

This course features three aspects that should be relatively original, even for those with some familiarity with military history. First, it is truly global in 

scope, including not only the more familiar battles of Western civilization 

but also pivotal ones in Asia, South America, India, and the Middle East. 

Thus, we’ll cover Mohamad of Ghor and the Battle of Tarain in India, as well 

as William the Conqueror and the Battle of Hastings; we’ll explore the Battle 

of Sacheon in Korea, as well as the Battle of Stalingrad. Second, the course 
analyzes both key land battles and naval clashes, topics that are frequently 
treated separately. Third, although many famous battles are included, there 

are also a good number that are not very well known, such as the battles of 
Cynocephalae, Yarmouk, Diu, and Ayacucho. Often, a more obscure battle 

whose outcome was actually more decisive is substituted for a much better 
known but, in reality, less pivotal one. Thus, instead of Marathon, we’ll 

look at Plataea; rather than Waterloo, we’ll explore Leipzig; and in place of 

Gettysburg, we’ll discuss Antietam.
The Decisive Battles of World History
Scope22Naturally, the lectures provide clear and vivid accounts of the campaigns and 
battles themselves, but they also offer in-depth descriptions of the cultural 

aspects of warfare, including the nature of the societies involved. We’ll come 

to understand, for example, how the code of samurai behavior shaped the 
outcome of the Battle of Sekigahara or how the attitudes of the Crusaders 
contributed to their defeat at the Battle of Hattin. Similarly, most lectures feature an examination of the often colorful 


politicians, soldiers, or inventors. We will witness, on the one hand, how 

the impetuosity of young Ramesses II brought him victory, while for the 

Prussian von Moltke, it was his coldly calculating mind that led to success. 


and interesting trivia. Thus, we’ll see how Horatio Nelson’s brilliant naval 

career nearly came to a premature end in the jaws of a polar bear and how 


been completely different if, in his youth, Admiral Yamamoto had lost three 

This course reveals the secrets behind of some of the most famous armies of all time, such as those of Alexander the Great and Genghis Khan, explaining 

the tactics and technologies that allowed them to triumph over their foes. It 
also traces the effects of changing technologies over time and shows how an 

edge in technology frequently resulted in military success, from the hoplite 
style of warfare of the ancient Greeks, to the innovative turtle ships of the 
Korean Admiral Yi, to the steel swords and primitive muskets of the Spanish 

conquistadors. Although perhaps unfortunate, it is nevertheless true that 

warfare typically sparks technological creativity and invention—consider the 





of technology often are found in the military. In examining the great battles 

of human history, we will also trace the overall history of technological 

innovation, from the Stone Age to the dawn of the Space Age.


course, but it will also be of great interest to anyone with a basic desire to 
understand why history turned out as it did and how we got to where we 3are today. Battles have served as the catalysts for many of the key turning 
points in the human story, and it is impossible to fully comprehend the 

development of civilizations, religions, technology, and cultural movements 

without considering the place of warfare in determining the course of events. 
Spanning the entire globe and all eras, this engaging series of lectures reveals 

4Lecture 1: Lecture 1: What Makes a Battle Decisive?What Makes a Battle Decisive?Lecture 1M
economic trends, demographic shifts—but one of the most 
frequent and dramatic is warfare. One obvious explanation for the widespread existence of war throughout human history is its potential 
for causing rapid change, and within warfare, the most concentrated form 
of change is individual battles. It is this potential to rapidly alter the status 
quo and initiate dramatic shifts in fortune or dominance that causes battles to 


to examine some of the key battles that, for one reason or another, have 

signaled fundamental shifts in the direction of events. When Is a “Decisive Battle” Not?On July 20, 1866, just off the coast of modern Croatia, Admiral 
Wilhelm von Tegetthoff led an Austrian naval squadron against an 


Undeterred, Tegetthoff arranged his ships into an arrowhead 

formation and boldly drove them straight at the long, menacing 
line of Italian warships. This confrontation, which would be known 

as the Battle of Lissa, had all the makings of one of the decisive 
battles in history: 
o Its immediate outcome would determine the fate of the city  of Venice.
o It would decide who would control the Mediterranean Sea. o It was part of a larger confrontation between two grand 
coalitions of nations. o 
between large numbers of ironclads, a potent new form of 

naval vessel that promised to instantly render all previous 
wooden warships obsolete. 5The turning point of the battle came when Tegetthoff used his 


Affondatore
. The attack ripped a huge hole in the side of the Italian 
vessel and, within minutes, the stricken ship rolled over and went to 
the bottom.Yet today, the Battle of Lissa is hardly remembered. Why? First, 
its strategic importance as an Austrian victory was eclipsed when, 

in the same month, the Battle of Könnigrätz delivered a crushing 
defeat at the hands of the Prussians, resulting in the fall of the 
Austrian Empire. Second, the conclusions that naval strategists 
drew from Lissa were completely wrong. 
o The battle was interpreted as establishing the dominance of ramming as a tactic in future naval warfare, with the effect that 

all major warships for the next 40 years were built with rams. 
In reality, the utility of ramming was an anomaly. 
o For several generations, huge battleships still sported 
ludicrous and useless rams, even though naval battles of the 

next half century would be fought at increasingly long ranges 

by massive cannons. 
Features of Decisive Battles
In this course, we will examine famous and not-so-famous battles, generals, tactics, strategies, weapons, and wars. Yet it is also a 

course about historical causation: why things turned out the way 

or were determined by, the very smallest of acts or chances.
If we look at the entire span of human warfare, twists of fate at pivotal moments turn out to be common. Consider:
o In the 17th
caused him to fail to make his customary nightly patrol, 

allow a successful surprise attack, with the effect that most of 

North America became British territory rather than a colony 
 of France? 
6Lecture 1: What Makes a Battle Decisive?o During the American Civil War, did a messenger’s carelessness 
result in the loss of vital battle plans, contributing to the 
ultimate defeat of the Confederacy? o During World War II, did a faulty mechanism on an aircraft-
launching catapult cause a fatal half-hour delay in launching a 
single plane, resulting in the destruction of the Japanese navy 

In certain instances, we will explore slightly more obscure battles rather than more famous ones if an interesting case can be made for 
the decisiveness of the less well-known battle. For example, from 
the Napoleonic wars, we will look at Leipzig rather than Waterloo. 
What makes a battle decisive? o First, it was one that was militarily decisive in that the defeat of one military force by another resulted in an immediate and 
obvious transfer of political power. A variant of this type is a 

decisive battle that results in the near or total destruction of a 
vital component of an opponent’s forces. Major naval battles, 

with their concentration of high-value units in one place, 
are especially prone to fall into this category. The Battle of 

Trafalgar, for example, had a profound effect on the rest of 


plans to invade England and drove him to the fatal decision to 
invade Russia instead.o Second, perhaps the most common type of decisive battle is one that subsequently had important social, political, or religious 
effects. In many cases, these battles may not have seemed 

pivotal at the time but have been recognized only in retrospect 
as demarcating a turning point. For example, the American 

War of Independence would have ended much sooner but 

for Washington’s daring crossing of the Delaware River and 

success at the Battle of Trenton. If not for this unlikely victory, 

the young American Republic would have been snuffed out of 

existence before it ever really got going. 7Other Considerations
Over the next 36 lectures, we will rummage through nearly 4,000 years of history and travel all around the globe looking for key 
turning points. During our search, we will examine both land battles 
and naval clashes, and we will consider some battles that involved 
millions of participants, while others featured just a handful of 
people. Some of our battles were immediately recognized at the 
time as being important transitional moments, while for others, 
their true importance was acknowledged only much later.
The list tends to favor battles that curbed or ended the growth of various expansionist empires because without such key defeats, 
those empires might well have extended their political and cultural 
domination yet further. The siege of Vienna in 1683, for example, 

represents the high-water mark of expansion for the Ottoman 
Empire.Another consideration in favor was for a battle whose outcome was either unexpected or uncertain. We will look at battles in which the 

sides were roughly evenly matched or for which it is easily possible 
to imagine a dramatically different outcome. 
Finally, some battles were selected as decisive because they 
represent the introduction of a key technological advance or the 
triumph of one type of military force over another. In the technology 

category could be considered the Battle of Midway, which set the 

pattern for future naval clashes being decided by air power rather 
than big guns. Of the second type, the Battle of Cynoscephalae 
revealed the superiority of the Roman military system over the 
previously dominant Hellenistic one and, thus, heralded Rome’s 

ascension over, and conquest of, the entire Mediterranean basin. 
Many of the battles we will look at could be placed into more than one of these categories. Also, strictly speaking, some of the battles 

presented here could be considered campaigns, and occasionally, 

we will lump together several closely related battles that resulted in 
a collective outcome.8Lecture 1: What Makes a Battle Decisive?Although this course is by no means a comprehensive history of warfare, it will inevitably trace or, perhaps more accurately, mirror 

the development of weapons, strategy, and tactics over time. 
A recurring theme of the lectures is technological change. 
The mighty steel dreadnaughts of the First World War—direct 

descendants of the Affondatore

tons of explosive shells 20 miles in one broadside. These ships 

were so expensive that the naval arms race between Great Britain 
and Germany nearly bankrupted both countries. When we examine 

the Battle of Midway, we will encounter aircraft carriers, which 

represented another key technological shift. Each of these types 
of vessel represented the most cutting-edge technology and was 
among the most expensive mobile manmade objects of its day.

decisive battles can be a useful analytical tool because it encourages 
us to view history not as a boring and immutable timeline but, 
instead, as a series of constantly branching pathways whose From the invention of the wheel through the development of the jet engine, 
© Willard/iStock/Thinkstock.
9outcomes and effects are frequently unpredictable and whose real 

Creasy, 
Fifteen Decisive Battles of the World
.Davis, 100 Decisive Battles from Ancient Times to the Present
. Holmes, . Weir, 
50 Battles That Changed the World
. 1. 
What qualities or characteristics do you think determine whether or not 
a battle deserves to be called “decisive”?2. 
Do you agree that individual battles can truly change the course 
of history, or are these events just symptomatic of broader 

underlying forces?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider10Lecture 2: 1274 B.C. Kadesh—Greatest Chariot Battle1274 B.C. Kadesh—Greatest Chariot BattleLecture 2In late May of 1274 B.C., on the banks of the river Orontes in Syria, the young ruler of Egypt, Ramesses II, rode at the head of a vast Egyptian 
army and was on the verge of leading them into a battle against his 

winning a victory that would catapult him into the ranks of the greatest 
among Egypt’s long line of glorious pharaohs. Unknowingly, however, the 

eager pharaoh was riding into a trap. The resultant clash would become 

known as the Battle of Kadesh, and it is the earliest battle in human history 
whose course and maneuvers we can reconstruct in detail. Background to Kadesh
In the generations leading up to the Battle of Kadesh, the main challenger to Egypt for supremacy in the eastern Mediterranean 
was the powerful Hittite empire based in Anatolia, a region that 

roughly corresponds to modern Turkey. 
Lying between was Syria, a strategic and economic crossroads 
that connected the Mediterranean basin to Mesopotamia and, 

therefore, became a hotly contested territory desired by both the 

Hittites and the Egyptians and regarded by both as lying within 



city of Kadesh and played the Hittites and the Egyptians against 
each other.
From a broader historical perspective, the Battle of Kadesh is notable not only for being our earliest detailed battle account but 

o It was one of the largest chariot battles in history. 
11o It resulted in one of the world’s earliest peace treaties whose 
full terms have survived.o It affected the course of ancient Near Eastern history 
 for centuries. o It formed the cornerstone of the reputation of one of Egypt’s 
most famous pharaohs.The OpponentsRamesses II was 29 years old and had ascended to the throne of Egypt during the period known as the New Kingdom, when Egypt 
became an imperialist power that sought to extend its sphere of 

along the Mediterranean coast. Ramesses’s father, Seti I, pursued an aggressively expansionist 
policy, personally leading several large military expeditions, 

crushing a coalition of Canaanite princes to conquer Palestine, and 
pushing north into Lebanon. Yet Kadesh had slipped from his grasp 

into alliance with the Hittites. Ramesses was eager to establish his own reputation as a great military pharaoh, and he already showed signs of being a 
charismatic leader and a competent strategist. For example, as soon 
as he gained the throne, he began to build up the army and establish 
forward bases that would provide essential logistical support for 
any major campaigns. Muwatalli, Ramesses’s Hittite opponent, was not originally 
intended to inherit the Hittite throne; he became king after his older 
brother died. Muwatalli’s father had fought against Seti; thus, the 

generational aspect. 12Lecture 2: 1274 B.C. Kadesh—Greatest Chariot BattleThe Egyptian Army and Its Technology 
The Egyptian army consisted of four divisions of infantry, each 
composed of 5,000 men and several thousand chariots. Modern 
estimates suggest that perhaps 500 chariots accompanied each of 
the divisions and constituted the elite strike force. The three components necessary for an effective war chariot are 
the spoked wheel, horses, and a reasonably powerful bow. These 

technologies seem to have come together in the 2
nd millennium B.C. 
and spread via nomadic Indo-European tribes throughout Eurasia. 
 war machines. 
o They emphasized speed and mobility and favored a lightweight design with six spoked wheels with narrow rims, a D-shaped 
cab made of ox hide stretched over a light wooden frame with 


horses were yoked. Egyptian chariots are frequently and vividly depicted in Egyptian art, giving us a good idea of their appearance and construction.© William McKelvie/iStock/Thinkstock.
13o The axle was set far to the rear for stability and a smaller turning radius, and the crew consisted of two men: a driver 
who also carried a shield and a warrior armed with a compound 

bow and javelins. o These vehicles could be readily broken down and carried by 
infantry in order to traverse rough ground. Their main purpose 

was to serve as rapidly moving archery platforms that could 
charge, spin around, retreat, and charge again while unleashing 

In addition to being the higher-status units of the army, the 
charioteers were also some of the more highly trained soldiers. 
When he accompanied the army, the pharaoh naturally assumed the 

role of the lead charioteer.
Although there was a permanent professional core to the army, in 
times of war, the majority of the ranks, especially the infantry, were 


with simple spears, bows, or a bronze axe or sword. Body armor 
was minimal, perhaps a skullcap or jerkin made of stiffened fabric 

or leather. 
The Hittite Army and Its Technology
Muwatalli had assembled a gigantic army, with an estimated size 
of 30,000 to 40,000 men and several thousand chariots. One source 
claims that there were 3,500 of these; if that number is accurate, this 
battle may well have been the largest clash of chariots in history. 

Egyptian version:
o It had a much heavier design, with a larger and more solid 
rectangular wooden cab.o The axle was centered beneath the cab rather than to the rear. 
14Lecture 2: 1274 B.C. Kadesh—Greatest Chariot Battleo It carried three crewmen: the driver, a warrior with a large shield 
and spear, and one wielding a long thrusting spear or a bow. 
In battle, the Hittites favored a single mass charge by the heavy 
chariots, intended to break the enemy’s ranks and then run them 

down by using the spears or shooting arrows.The Battle As Ramesses and the Egyptian army approached Kadesh, they were unaware that the Hittite army was nearby; thus, for ease of 
marching, the four divisions were spaced at intervals of roughly 
a half day’s march. Ramesses accompanied the lead division, 

Ammon. Behind them came the Ra, the P’tah, and the Set divisions. 
When Ammon crossed the Orontes, two men who appeared to be 
Bedouin locals but were actually Hittite agents told Ramesses that 
Muwatalli had been frightened at the Egyptians’ approach and had 

The camp guards then caught two Hittite spies lurking nearby who, after being subjected to a thorough beating, divulged that Muwatalli 

Kadesh and that his army was ready for battle. Ramesses immediately dispatched messengers with orders for all the elements of his scattered forces to converge on his location at 

maximum speed. Muwatalli sent forward a strong contingent of his chariots to intercept the Ra division as it attempted to march to the rescue, 
catching the Egyptians strung out in marching formation. The 

heavy Hittite chariots swept through the protective screen of lighter 
Egyptian chariots, slammed into the lines of marching infantry, and 

carved a path through the center of the Egyptian formation. The 

surviving troops panicked, broke formation, and ran. 15Following the retreating remnants of the Ra division, the Hittite chariots charged the Ammon camp, overrunning the shield wall 

formed to defend the camp. The charge took them into the midst 

of a maze of tents and wagons, piles of supplies, and military gear. 
The chaos bought Ramesses vital time to arm and organize himself 
and gather the chariots of the Ammon division, supplemented by the 

surviving Ra chariots. He then led the assembled Egyptian chariots 
in a counterattack against the now distracted and disorganized 

Hittite chariots.
entourage of chariots into the fray. Their effect was negated by the 

timely and long-awaited arrival of the Egyptian reinforcements. 

accompanied by advance units of the third Egyptian division. 
Assaulted from a new direction by the Ne’arin, the Hittites broke 
The arrival of the main body of the P’tah division late in the day and 
the reorganization of the surviving Ammon and Ra units further tilted 

the balance in Ramesses’s favor and effectively ended the battle. 
Although the vast majority of his army, including all the infantry, 
had not been engaged, Muwatalli withdrew within the walls of 


from the jaws of defeat. The day after the battle, Ramesses signed a truce with Muwatalli and returned with his army to Egypt. The Hittites retained control 

of Kadesh. Who Won the Battle of Kadesh? 
In a narrow tactical sense, Ramesses can be considered the victor 

the campaign because they accomplished the main goal of the war: 
possession of the city of Kadesh. 16Lecture 2: 1274 B.C. Kadesh—Greatest Chariot BattleAlthough this battle was less decisive in military terms than others, it permanently ended the multigenerational war between two of the 
greatest powers of the era: Sixteen years after the battle, Ramesses 
and the Hittites signed a remarkable peace treaty. 

o It contains provisions establishing borders, mutual declarations not to invade each other’s territory, promises of support if one 

or the other country is attacked or to help suppress internal 
rebellions, and extradition of political refugees. o The treaty ushered in an unprecedented era of peace in the ancient Near East that would last nearly a century. 
The Battle of Kadesh is also important because it served as the foundation of Ramesses’s reputation as a leader, which he would 

amply exploit over the course of a 66-year reign. During this time, 
he built many of the most famous monuments of ancient Egypt. In the next lecture, we will move north along the shores of the Mediterranean to examine a pivotal battle fought between the 
ancient Greeks and the mighty empire of Persia.Cotterell, Chariot.Gardiner, 
The Kadesh Inscriptions of Ramesses II. Goedicke, ed., Perspectives on the Battle of Kadesh. Healy, 
The Warrior Pharaoh
.Shaw and Boatright, “Ancient Egyptian Warfare.” 
1. 
What do you think are the pros and cons of chariot warfare?2. 
In what ways did the personality of Ramesses affect the battle, taking 
into account his actions before and during it?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider17479 B.C. Plataea—Greece Wins Freedom
Lecture 3Some battles are decisive because of what they prevent from happening. 
The Battle of Plataea, which took place in 479 B.C. and was fought 
between the united city-states of ancient Greece and the Persian Empire, is one of these. If the Greeks had lost this battle and become merely 


in the 5th century B.C. might not have taken place. At the very least, a Persian 
victory would have resulted in a different course of history.
Background to Plataea
Plataea is not nearly so well-known as three other battles fought between the Greeks and Persians within an 11-year span. 

Thermopylae was a Greek defeat, and Marathon and Salamis, 
although Greek victories, were only temporary setbacks for Persia, 
Plataea, however, was decisive. It effectively ended the war and 
ensured Greek independence and freedom, thus making possible 
the Greek golden age.The Opponents On the one side was mighty Persia, a culturally sophisticated, ethnically diverse, and economically prosperous empire that 
stretched from the Mediterranean to the borders of modern India. Pitted against this colossus were the Greek city-states, a group of small, separate political entities on the mainland of Greece and 
the islands of the Aegean Sea that shared a common language 
 and culture. The largest was Athens, known for its boldness and creativity, 
which had begun to experiment with forms of democracy. Next was 

Sparta, inward-looking, suspicious, and possessed of a small but 18Lecture 3: 479 B.C. Plataea—Greece Wins Freedom


The Greek Army and Its Technology
During the 6th century B.C., a military innovation occurred in 

armed and armored foot 
soldiers fought in an 
organized formation, 

carrying a heavy, circular, 

concave shield three feet 
in diameter and shaped so 
the hoplites could nestle 
their shoulders and torsos 
within the curve. The other standard piece of equipment was a long 
stabbing spear equipped 
with a bronze spearhead 
and a smaller bronze butt-
spike that could function both as an alternate spear point if the main 
one broke off and for downward thrusts. 
The hoplite was a formidable opponent, protected from the front from head to toe in solid armor. Yet the weight of his shield and 

armor made him cumbersome, and he was vulnerable to attack from 
the sides and behind. The solution to this vulnerability was the phalanx: long rows, several men deep, with their shields close to one another or at 
times even overlapping. Fighting as a phalanx, each man in essence 
protected his neighbor, and as long as the phalanx kept its cohesion 

and no one allowed a gap to open, it was highly effective. 
Some historians believe that the hoplite revolution led to a so-called “Western way of war” that emphasized well-organized 
Hoplite warfare worked best when each man acted as an identical 
and interchangeable cog in the war 
© Bibi Saint-Pol,/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain.
19heavy infantry and decisive battles with the purpose of killing one’s foes and that this style of warfare accounts for much of the 

success of Western Europe in conquering the globe during the era 

of colonialism. The Persian Army and Its Technology

Empire, including a wide range of troop types, weapons, and 
armor. The bulk of the army comprised temporary conscripts, but 

it also included a number of more professional contingents. The 

Persians also employed mercenaries in their army, including large 

contingents of Greek hoplites.Among the professional soldiers were the Immortals, a well-trained, cohesive group of 10,000 elite infantry. Their shields, often made 

of wicker or animal hides, offered far less protection compared to 

the heavy wood and bronze carried by the typical hoplite, and their 
body armor was similarly lightweight. Some of the best units in the Persian army were the cavalry, 
considered the most prestigious arm of the military and, thus, 
appropriate for the aristocracy. Persian horsemen wielded light 

spears, axes, and swords, but their armor was relatively light. The principal weapon of the Persians was the bow, used by both 
foot and mounted archers, and Persian military tactics often featured 
harassing squadrons of horse archers who would charge in, release 


Precipitating Events 

eastern Greek cities that had been absorbed by the Persian Empire. 
Although the insurrection was crushed, the rebels had received 
some aid from the Greek mainland. The Persian king viewed this 

aid as unwarranted interference and launched a punitive expedition 
in 490 B.C. 20Lecture 3: 479 B.C. Plataea—Greece Wins Freedom
At the subsequent Battle of Marathon, the Persians suffered a 
surprise defeat at the hands of the Athenians. Although Marathon 



demonstrating the superiority of the hoplite style of warfare in 
hand-to-hand combat, from the Persian perspective, it was a minor 
setback for a small expeditionary force. The Persians recognized that they would have to send another army to crush the Greeks, but internal politics delayed their return for 10 

years. In 480 B.C., a massive land and sea invasion force crossed 
the Hellespont, led personally by Xerxes, king of Persia, intending 
to overwhelm and subjugate the Greeks. The Greeks attempted to stop the Persians by occupying the pass 

numbers as a factor. It was a good strategy, undone when a traitor 

showed the Persians an alternate route through the mountains. 
Although a rear guard of 300 Spartans volunteered to stay and hold 
off the Persians while the others escaped, they were slaughtered, 

The Battle of Thermopylae vividly demonstrated the bravery of 
the Spartans, but it did nothing to stop the Persian advance, which 


and the Persians occupied and burned it. The Greeks recycled their Thermopylae strategy at sea, opposing 
the Persian navy in a narrow strait between the mainland and the 
island of Salamis. The resulting naval battle was a success for the 


Yet the victory of Salamis did not end the invasion and left the real 

threat to Greece, the vast Persian land army, untouched and still 

occupying central Greece. What Salamis did accomplish was to complicate supplying the huge Persian army. Accordingly, Xerxes decided to return to Persia 

with many of the conscripts, while leaving behind the best elements 21of his army to complete the conquest of southern Greece. The  
general in charge of this task was Mardonius, an experienced 

military commander. 
The Battle Mardonius chose the 10,000 Immortals, as well as large infantry 
and cavalry contingents, as his army. The resulting force was, in 
many ways, more dangerous than the bloated force that had invaded 
Greece, and it was still much larger than any army the Greeks could 

collectively muster. 
Mardonius camped for the winter, during which he made several 
attempts to break up the Greek alliance by exploiting traditional 
rivalries and suspicions. This strategy almost worked, but most of 

the Greeks united and marched north against him. Mardonius took up a position along the Asopos River, near Thebes, 
which had thrown in its lot with the Persians out of jealousy of 
Athens. The best modern guess is that probably 80,000 to100,000 

Greeks squared off against about 100,000 to 150,000 Persians, 

Thebans, and other pro-Persian Greeks.
strong cavalry forces to harass the Greeks and search for a weak 
spot. During this clash, the popular leader of the Persian cavalry, 

a man named Masistos, was unhorsed and killed when an arrow 
killed his mount. After some bitter skirmishing over the body, the 

Persians retreated, leaving the trophy in the hands of the Greeks. After a week or so of standoff, Mardonius began sending elements 
of his cavalry on raids behind the Greek line, harassing their supply 
trains and eventually capturing one of their key water sources. 

Running short on food and water, the Greek commanders decided 

to pull back during the night to a well-watered and more defensible 
area called “the island.” 22Lecture 3: 479 B.C. Plataea—Greece Wins Freedom
o But the Greeks bungled the retreat. One contingent of refused to move, they were strung out. o Seeing an opportunity to destroy them, Mardonius ordered a general advance, and the Persians and their allies swept 
forward. Almost unintentionally, the main battle was joined. 
The battle came down to a savage close-quarters shoving match in which desperate Persians grabbed and broke the Greeks’ spears. In 

this melee, the heavier armor of the Greeks gave them an advantage. 
Mardonius and his bodyguard were killed, along with many of the 
best of the Persian troops. The battle turned into a rout, with the 

triumphant Greeks chasing and slaughtering the defeated Persians. Outcomes On the same day as the Battle of Plataea, a naval battle against 
and this moment marked the end of the Persian threat. The war 

would continue for decades, but it was the Greeks who were on  

the offensive. 
The victory at Plataea ushered in a period known as the Pentekonteia, a 50-year period regarded as the golden age of Greece that ended 
when they once more fell prey to their old rivalries, resulting in the 
disastrous 30-year Peloponnesian War.
To commemorate Plataea, the Greeks melted down some of 
the Persian weapons and used the bronze to erect a column at 

Delphi. It was stolen 800 years later by Constantine and moved to 
Constantinople, where it decorated the horse-racing arena. It can 
still be seen in Istanbul, and it still legibly bears the names of the 31 
23Connolly, 
Greece and Rome at War
. De Souza, Heckel, and Llewellyn-Jones, The Greeks at War
.Green, The Greco-Persian Wars
. Herodotus, The Landmark Herodotus
.———, Histories Book IX. Shepherd, Plataea 479 BC. 1. 
In what ways might history have been different if Persia had won the 
Battle of Plataea and conquered Greece?2. 
What are the strengths and weaknesses of the hoplite style of warfare?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider24

Lecture 4What are the qualities that make an outstanding general? Intelligence? Creativity? Daring? Calculation? Charisma? Luck? 

often regarded as one of the greatest generals of all time. He conquered most 
of the known world, was victorious in four major battles, conducted several 
successful sieges, and held together a multinational army during an epic 
march across much of Europe and Asia. His name, of course, was Alexander, 

more commonly known as Alexander the Great. 
Background to Gaugamela
The Battle of Gaugamela, perhaps Alexander’s greatest victory, 
demonstrates that one of the keys to his success as a general was 
his unusual combination of cautious preparation before battle and 
quick-thinking boldness once engaged. The golden age of the Greeks had ended with the long, destructive 
Peloponnesian War, in which the 

Greeks again turned against one 
another. Although Sparta was the 

nominal victor, all participants 

were exhausted and impoverished 
by the struggle.Over the next half century, a 
new power arose to the north: 
Macedonia, a minor, disunited 

state, weakly controlled by a 
hereditary king. Between 359 
B.C., when Philip II came to 
the throne, and 339 B.C., he 
transformed Macedonia into a 
combined a sharp intelligence 
with great athleticism; he was 

gift of inspiring intense loyalty 
among his followers.© Patricia Hofmeester/iStock/Thinkstock.25
he then used to conquer his neighbors and create a Macedonian 
empire.When Philip was assassinated in 336 B.C., Alexander succeeded 
to the throne at the age of 20. The young king quickly secured 

his position, getting the army to swear an oath of loyalty to 

him personally, killing any who might be potential rivals, and 

suppressing several revolts.The Opponents At the time of his death, Philip had been planning an expedition against Persia’s westernmost regions, ostensibly in revenge for 

Persia’s invasions of Greece more than 100 years earlier. Alexander 

now took up this plan, and in the spring of 334 B.C., he crossed the 
Hellespont into Asia at the head of a Macedonian-Greek army of 

approximately 45,000 infantry and 5,000 cavalry.
The Persian Empire at the time of Alexander unquestionably 
remained the superpower of the region. The current king of kings 

was Darius III, who had come to the throne in 336 B.C. The ancient 



portraits of Darius, with most depicting him as weak and indecisive. 


rebellion in Egypt.The Macedonian Army and Its Technology
In revamping the Macedonian army, Philip made a number of 
innovations to the successful model of the Greek hoplite phalanx: 
o He equipped the Macedonian phalanx with an extra-long spear called a sarissa, rather than the shorter spear of the hoplite.o He lightened the soldiers’ armor, particularly reducing the size 
and weight of the shield.Maintaining order in wielding these weapons required considerable drilling and discipline; thus, Philip made his army a permanent, 26
professional one. He also included contingents of other types  of troops:
o He added archers and slingers to harass the enemy from a distance. There were swift, agile, lightly armed troops to act 
 as skirmishers.o There were sizable cavalry units, some of which were light cavalry used as scouts, while others were heavy cavalry who 
could break an enemy line.
o 

circumstances and conditions. o It put greater emphasis on good generalship. A clever general 
might give separate missions to different parts of his army or 

send units in different directions. Used creatively, it was an 

army with great potential.The Persian Army and Its Technology
The Persian army was much the same as that which the Greeks had faced at Plataea. Its elite infantry were the 10,000 Immortals.The strength of the Persian army was its numerous and well-trained cavalry, and a favored weapon among both infantry and horsemen 

was the bow, although a wide array of swords, spears, and axes 

were also employed.Precipitating Events
After crossing into Asia and visiting Troy, Alexander began 
his invasion of the Persian Empire. The governor of the region 

organized the local forces, including a number of Greek hoplite 

mercenaries, and marched out to confront him. At the Battle of 

the Granicus, Alexander led a charge and won the victory. He then 

proceeded deep into Asia Minor, conquering cities as he went. 
27Recognizing Alexander as a serious threat, Darius determined to 

Macedonians. They met in 333 B.C. at the Battle of Issus, and 

although outnumbered, Alexander again prevailed, personally 

leading the charge. 
Rather than immediately pursuing Darius, Alexander spent several 

Darius spent this time preparing for their next confrontation. Both 
knew that the next time they met would be the decisive battle to 
determine which was to rule the Persian Empire.The Battle Darius’s most obvious advantage was numerical, and he used the 
interval to gather a vast army from every corner of his empire. 
expanse along the Tigris River near Gaugamela, where no 


the Persian numerical superiority could be used to full effect. 
Finally, Darius created a special weapon of 200 chariots with blades 
attached to their wheels. These would be launched against the 

Macedonian phalanx; the blades would literally carve openings in 
the formations, into which the cavalry could pour.
Alexander’s advisors, frightened by the size of the Persian army, 
urged him to attack at night to mask their inferior numbers. 

Refusing this advice, Alexander went to bed. Darius, fearing just 

such an assault, kept his army standing ready for battle all night. By 
morning, Alexander had already scored an advantage: His troops 

were well rested in contrast to the sleepless Persians.Alexander’s most pressing problem was the lack of a geographic 
anchor to prevent encirclement.28
o His solution was to stagger his forces at an angle on the left and right sides of the phalanx so that they could face an enemy 
encircling movement head on. o At a distance behind the main phalanx, he positioned a second line made up of allies and mercenaries. o 
them and surround his army, it could form a hollow rectangle 

with men facing outward in all directions. As the battle began, Alexander led his cavalry to the right. Darius 
ordered his cavalry to mirror Alexander’s movements, with the result 

that the lines were stretched out and the center of gravity began to 

shift away from the ground that Darius had so carefully prepared. 
Darius therefore ordered his scythed chariots to charge, but the 
Macedonian skirmishers and javeliners picked off the charioteers. 

When the remainder reached the phalanx, the Macedonians opened 
lanes for the chariots to pass harmlessly. As they slowed to turn, 

lightly armed troops killed the rest of the charioteers. Determined to contain Alexander’s sweep, Darius dispatched 
more Persian cavalry to block him, and an intense cavalry battle 

ensued. Meanwhile, on the left, the Macedonian phalanx was hard 

pressed and in danger of losing contact with Alexander and the 

Macedonian right. 
A gap developed in the Macedonian line, into which a group of 
Persian cavalry poured. Had they wheeled to the right and struck 
the main phalanx from behind, they might well have broken the 
phalanx and won the battle. But the Persian cavalry began looting 
the Macedonian baggage train; thus, elements of the second line of 
the Macedonian phalanx had time to confront and contain them. Meanwhile, Alexander had decided to take advantage of the parallel 
stretching of the Persian lines, and he now led a bold charge, cutting 
29
where Darius stood in his chariot. The Companion cavalry, formed 

into a wedge with Alexander himself at its head, crashed into the 

Persian ranks. Darius apparently took fright and, just as he had at the earlier Battle 


routed them. Alexander had won the battle and, with it, the Persian Empire. Although Darius escaped and would manage to evade capture for 
another year or so, until mortally wounded by his own men, from 

throne; Alexander became the new king of kings of Persia.
Outcomes 


But through a combination of carefully preparing and training 
his army and skillfully and boldly using them during the battle, 
Alexander is sometimes accused of impulsiveness, but he showed calculation after Issus in not pursuing Darius and, instead, 


his supply lines. Even in the heat of combat at Gaugamela, he 
demonstrated sound judgment in curtailing his charge and going to 

the aid of his phalanx.After Gaugamela, Alexander went on to capture the royal cities 
of Persia. Even though his united empire did not survive beyond 
his own lifetime, his real legacy was the spread of Greek culture 
throughout the empire. Indeed, the next period of Mediterranean 30
history is termed the Hellenistic era because of the domination of Greek, or Hellenic, culture. If not for Alexander’s victory at Gaugamela, Greek civilization 
might never have spread beyond the boundaries of Greece and, 


Western civilization.
Engels, Alexander the Great and the Logistics of the Macedonian Army
. Fox, Alexander the Great
.

Heckel and Jones, Macedonian Warrior
. Sekunda and Warry, 
Alexander the Great
.1. 
How much of Alexander’s success do you think was the result of 
Philip’s actions?
2. 
How much of a role did Alexander’s personality play in his success?
Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider31Lecture 5Other than a scattering of Greek colonies, the poorer, less civilized 
western Mediterranean had not been much of a concern for the 
Hellenistic kingdoms of the 3rd century B.C., but by its end, a new 
power had arisen in the west. These were the Romans, who had slowly 

spread from their city beside the Tiber to conquer most of Italy. They had 

then fought two bitter wars against their rival, Carthage, to emerge as the 

dominant force in the western Mediterranean. Now these upstarts were 
showing an inclination to spread into the eastern part of the sea.Background to Cynoscephalae
In the autumn of 197 B.C., two armies representing two very different military systems engaged in a battle that would 

determine which of those systems was superior, with far-reaching 

consequences for world history. One of these armies was led 

by King Philip V of Macedon. The second was a Roman one 

commanded by Titus Quinctius Flamininus. 
The Romans had enjoyed success against their mostly barbarian foes in the west, but now they were encountering the highly skilled, 
professional, and experienced armies of the east. Because the two 
forces were almost exactly the same size, the battle constituted an 
important showdown between rival military styles and systems, 
with nothing less than the domination of the entire Mediterranean 
at stake.The Opponents From the foundation of Rome in 753 B.C. until the Punic Wars 
about 500 years later, the Roman military was not noticeably 

better than its opponents in terms of training, professionalism, or 
equipment. In fact, it had suffered a number of defeats at the hands 

of various enemies: 32o After breaking away from Etruscan domination, Rome was sacked by Gauls in 390 B.C.o In 321 B.C., the Romans were beaten and ritually humiliated by the Samnites at the Battle of the Caudine Forks. o In the 280s, the Greek mercenary general Pyrrhus destroyed two Roman armies.o Finally, in the Punic Wars, the Romans lost several successive 


three times in Italy itself by the Carthaginian military genius 
Hannibal. Rome’s darkest hour came at the Battle of Cannae 

when, in one afternoon, Hannibal obliterated two entire Roman 
armies, killing between 60,000 and 80,000 men. Yet Rome usually ended up winning wars. The key to the Romans’ 
early success was a dogged determination never to give up, no 
matter what the cost, coupled with vast reserves of manpower drawn 
from the Italian cities they had conquered and given citizenship. 
These manpower reserves repeatedly enabled the Romans to keep 
The Romans learned from their enemies, as well. They adopted 
weapons and tactics that took the best from each foe: for example, 
the short sword of the hill tribes of Spain, which evolved into the 
gladius and became an immediately recognizable symbol of Roman 
imperialism and military might. In its weapons, tactics, and organization, the army of Philip V of 
Macedonia was a direct descendant of the army commanded by 

Alexander the Great. At Alexander’s death, his empire had split 



using Alexander’s style of warfare. These Hellenistic kingdoms 

were powerful and wealthy, and collectively, they controlled the 

richer, more urban, more culturally sophisticated eastern half of 

the Mediterranean.33Roman and Macedonian Forces and Technology
By the time of Cynoscephalae, a new Roman army, with better 
weapons, better tactics, and more training, was in place. In its 
earliest phase, it probably 
fought in something like the 
phalanx used by the Greeks, 
but by the late 4th century 
B.C., it had begun to use a 
system sometimes called the 
manipular army. 
In this system, the army was drawn up in subunits called 
maniples, blocks of 120 men 
arranged into three lines on 

 like formation. 
o 
the hastati, wore a helmet and had a large oblong or 

rectangular shield called 
a scutum. They were armed with javelins and 
the gladius. The second 
line, the principes, were similarly equipped. The third line, the 
triarii, had longer thrusting spears and may have been composed of older men. o There were also groups of lightly armed skirmishers called velites and a contingent of cavalry. 
o In combat, the maniples used a loose formation that allowed soldiers in the back ranks to come forward and replace those 
in the front row, thus keeping fresh those actually engaged in 
 Around the time of Cynoscephalae, the Roman 
military made the transition from 
a primarily citizen militia to a 
professional standing army.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock. 34A major advantage was the way the army was subdivided into 






with the massive Hellenistic phalanx, which while powerful when 
lumbering forward for a direct assault, was slow and could not 
easily be subdivided or redirected. The heart of Philip’s Macedonian army was its phalanx, composed 
of a block of 15,000 men armed, just like Alexander’s phalanx, with 

the long sarissa. They were supported by about 10,000 cavalry, 

missile troops, and skirmishers. The Generals Philip V was an able and experienced general and politician, 
sometimes likened to Alexander. By the time of the Battle of 

Cynoscephalae, he had held the throne for more than 20 years and 
was well regarded as a leader. He had led a number of successful 

military campaigns, extending the borders of his empire into the 
islands of the Aegean, and had skillfully attempted to create a 

coalition of states to oppose the growing power of Rome. Titus Quinctius Flamininus also had considerable military 
experience before Cynoscephalae and had distinguished himself as 


o One distinguishing feature of Flamininus was that, for a Roman, he was unusually infatuated with Greek culture. He 
o 
was able to persuade a number of Greek states to join him by 
presenting himself as the savior of Greece, who would free it 
from Macedonian control. 35The Battle Cynoscephalae represented much more than a clash between Rome and the Hellenistic kingdoms of the east. It was a battle between 
two different types of military systems. The two sides were almost 

exactly evenly matched at about 25,000 men each; thus, the battle 
would be a good test of which system was superior.
The battle opened with some confused skirmishing between small detachments, indicating to both generals that their opponent’s main 

force was nearby. Flamininus accordingly deployed his army in the 

customary formation: the three rows of maniples screened by the 
velites. By choosing to move immediately into combat formation, Flamininus gained an advantage: He would begin the battle with 
his troops arranged exactly as he wanted them. On the other hand, 
deploying immediately meant that his men had to line up on the 
slope of one of the hills, thus yielding the advantage of the higher 
ground to Philip’s army. 
By the time Flamininus’s men made contact with the enemy, the 
Macedonian phalanx had formed up and could add the momentum 
of a downhill charge to its already formidable strength. The 

Roman left could not resist the weight of this attack and began 
to give ground, retreating back down the slope. Even though they 

Romans kept their formation and did not panic. Flamininus had a few war elephants with him with which he 
opened gaps in the Macedonian lines—exactly the sort of weak 

points that the Roman manipular system was designed to exploit. 

Reeling from this assault, the Macedonian left began to run, 

pursued by the Romans. 
This was the crucial point of the battle. A substantial gap now 
developed between the two halves of the respective formations, 
effectively splitting them into separate battles. The Romans were 

in the process of winning one side, and the Macedonians the other, 

with overall victory still up for grabs. 36


maniples from the right wing to break away, wheel 90 degrees to the 

left, and attack downhill against the rear right of the Macedonian 
phalanx that was threatening to overwhelm the Roman left. The 

effect was immediate. The men of the cumbersome Macedonian 

phalanx were unable to move to meet this new threat. Attacked 

from both the front and behind, the Macedonian right disintegrated, 
and the men were slaughtered as they attempted to run away. 
Outcomes Cynoscephalae ended the war. Following the victory, Flamininus 
announced that the Greeks were now free from Macedonian 
oppression. What the Greeks failed to realize was that the Romans 

now regarded them as their clients, and they had to do whatever 
Rome wanted. For the moment, the Romans allowed Philip to retain his throne, but 
within two decades, another war broke out. 
o If there were any lingering doubts about the superiority of the Roman military system or any idea that the outcome of 


to rest in a Roman rematch against the Macedonian phalanx. 
Pydna was a head-on clash in the sort of environment in which 
the phalanx usually excelled, yet it crumbled. o 


machine was now qualitatively superior to most of its foes. 37Connolly, 
Greece and Rome at War
.Hammond, “The Campaign and Battle of Cynoscephalae in 197 BC.”
Plutarch, Life of Flamininus.Polybius, History of Rome.1. 
In what ways was the Roman legionary system superior to the Macedonian phalanx?2. 
Can you identify any potential weaknesses in the Romans’ style 

Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider38Lecture 6: 31 B.C. Actium—Birth of the Roman Empire
31 B.C. Actium—Birth of the Roman Empire
Lecture 6As early as the 3rd millennium B.C., naval warfare occurred in the 
Mediterranean, and by the 2nd millennium B.C., the Egyptians were 
conducting large-scale amphibious warfare, transporting troops 
in ships from the Nile region and landing them in Palestine. The Battle of 

Actium is representative of the dominant style of naval combat used for most 
of history; it marks the end of the Roman Republic and the beginning of the 
Roman Empire, as well as the solidifying of Rome’s domination over the 

entire Mediterranean basin.Ancient Naval Warfare
During a nearly 4,000-year stretch beginning in the 3rd millennium 
B.C., the main warship was the galley, a long, narrow vessel 

propelled by dozens or even hundreds of rowers. Such warships 
lacked the stability or the storage capacity to travel the open seas 
and typically hugged the coasts. One battle technique was to equip these vessels with a ram at the bow, which they would try to crash into the hull of enemy ships. 

The Greeks of the 5th century B.C. emphasized seamanship, with the 
primary goal to position a ship so as to ram the opponent broadside. 
A variant on this tactic was to sweep alongside an enemy vessel and 

break off its oars. 
All these maneuvers demanded speed, nimbleness, and a high degree of skill from the rowers. The ship design that developed 

to optimize these qualities was the trireme. A classic trireme was 

about 115 feet long and only 20 feet wide, with some 200 rowers 

on three levels packed into the narrow hull. A triple-pointed bronze 



a small number of marines, usually no more than 35, stood on the 
upper deck armed with bows. 39
using the ramming strategy, they tended to favor naval battle tactics 

that involved ships meeting in such a way that the soldiers they 

Naval warfare had already been tending this way with the construction of larger warships; they could carry greater numbers of 

soldiers and were less maneuverable, but they often had collapsible 
wooden turrets from which several men could shoot bows or even 
throw down rocks on an enemy’s deck. They also began to carry 

catapults and ballistas that could hurl stones or oversize arrows at 
the crews of opposing ships.Historical Background and Opponents 
In the 150 years following Cynoscephalae, the Roman Republic swallowed up the remaining Hellenistic kingdoms and extended 
its boundaries around almost the entire coast of the Mediterranean The Olympias, a modern replica of a trireme, proved surprisingly fast in trials, achieving speeds of more than nine knots for short bursts.© Filos96/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain.
40Lecture 6: 31 B.C. Actium—Birth of the Roman Empire
Sea. Although Rome had achieved great success with its overseas 
conquests, these same successes had created severe internal strains 
in the fabric of the republican system of government. What had been a ruling coalition of powerful families had devolved into a few strong men dominating through wealth, power, and 

B.C., a sequence of these men—Marius, Sulla, Pompey, and Julius 

Caesar—had fought a brutal series of what were essentially civil 
wars. Yet none was able to hold on to power permanently. 
Even if the republic was no longer a political reality, many of its 
ideals remained powerful, and the strongest of these was a deep-
seated aversion to being ruled by a king or anyone who acted like a 
king. This sentiment led to the assassination of Julius Caesar in 44 

B.C., when his behavior became too monarchial.Caesar’s death left two candidates vying for power in Rome: 
o 
who inherited most of Caesar’s wealth, prestige, and the loyalty 

of the majority of his legions. Mark Antony was direct and 

tough, a military man who got along well with the common 
soldier; he could hold the allegiance of his men by sharing 
their witticisms and living conditions, but he did not have the 
subtlety of mind for complex political machinations. o The second was Octavian, a boy just out of his teens, whom Caesar posthumously adopted as his son. Octavian possessed 

affairs to give the appearance he desired them to have. He 





and forthright, a natural military commander of considerable 
genius. With Octavian directing grand political strategy and 



they were a formidable pair41Because neither Octavian nor Antony was quite ready for open 


continued to maneuver for dominance. Antony chose the eastern 

half of the empire, which had always been the richer portion. 
Octavian was left with west, but this included Italy and Rome itself.Antony’s sphere also encompassed the last remaining independent 
state, Egypt, now ruled by the young Queen Cleopatra, a highly 
intelligent and assertive woman. Their relationship provided the 

wily Octavian with the ammunition for a war of propaganda against 
Antony, whom he portrayed as totally under Cleopatra’s control. 

Octavian’s rumor mill cleverly exploited traditional Roman phobias 

of domination by foreign monarchs.The Battle 

Gulf of Ambracia, where it would be safe from storms, and the bulk 

of the army was encamped nearby. Expecting Octavian to attack 

from the north, Antony also occupied a number of key towns along 


lines to Egypt. Agrippa, in charge of Octavian’s campaign, demonstrated his 

Epirus in the north, as Antony expected, he led a naval assault 

against the city of Methone far to the south, threatening Antony’s 

vital supply line, and began raiding other points on the southern 
coast of Greece. Falling into Agrippa’s trap, Antony diverted many of his ships from 
the northern coast to the south. Octavian now brought the main 
body of his army across from Italy and landed them at Panormus 
in the north, just as Antony had expected, and they marched down 

the coast to the Gulf of Ambracia. A stalemate developed, with 

Antony’s army encamped on the southern side of the gulf and 

Octavian’s on the northern.
42Lecture 6: 31 B.C. Actium—Birth of the Roman Empire
Meanwhile, Agrippa continued his raids along the coast, capturing 
one strategic position after another. This string of victories not 

only raised the morale of Octavian’s troops while eroding that of 

Antony’s, but they also put a stranglehold on Antony’s supply lines. 

Compounding his problems, Antony’s camp was on low-lying 

ground, and his men were wracked by malaria and dysentery; as a 
result, Antony’s army began to suffer deaths and desertions.
Antony now had to act before he lost his whole force, and he chose 
and 2,000 archers. It is uncertain whether Antony’s plan was to 


escape with as much of his force as possible. Antony deployed his ships in four groups—a right wing, a left 
wing, a center, and a reserve—each consisting of about 60 galleys, 

with himself in command of the right wing. Octavian’s forces of 

nearly 400 ships and about 40,000 soldiers took up position in 

a broad arc, with Agrippa on the left side, facing Antony, and 

Octavian on the right. 
Antony had hoped that Octavian would rush forward to attack him in the shallows, where Octavian’s greater number of ships could 


to come out to him, even backing up slightly to ensure that Antony 





battle devolved into a series of individual combats among small 
groups of ships. Two or three of Octavian’s smaller ships clustered 


then closing to board. 
Antony’s, a gap opened up in the center of Octavian’s line. 

Immediately, Cleopatra’s reserve squadron raised their sails and 

lunged through. Making no attempt to engage Octavian, they set 43course for Egypt. Antony, seeing Cleopatra escaping, transferred 


but were overwhelmed. Estimates are that around 150 of Antony’s 

ships were taken or destroyed, added to the approximately 150 


of his army.
Outcomes Antony may have believed he could recover and rebuild his forces after the Battle of Actium, but his reputation was irretrievably 

damaged. Although he caught up with Cleopatra and both reached 

Egypt safely, in terms of opposing Octavian after Actium, they were 


Octavian was now the sole ruler of the Roman world. Drawing on his skill at manipulating images, he cloaked his power in innocuous-



themselves, lulling Romans into a false belief that the republic lived 
on. In reality, it was dead, and Octavian, under the new name of 


Augustus’s settlement of the Roman state and his establishment of 
the position of emperor would form the system of government for 
the next 500 years. He and the empire would continue to exert a 

from Charlemagne to Napoleon to Mussolini.44Lecture 6: 31 B.C. Actium—Birth of the Roman Empire
Casson, Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World
.Gurval, Actium and Augustus
.Morrison, et al., Athenian Trireme
. Sheppard, Actium 31 BC.1. 
Why do you think naval combat centering on oared galleys remained so constant in the Mediterranean for so many thousands of years?2. 
What key mistakes did Anthony make that contributed to his defeat at 

Actium, and which one was the worst?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider45
Lecture 7Few countries can boast that they have had approximately the same culture, language, borders, and religions continuously for more than 
2,000 years, but such is the case with China. During a roughly 150-year period, from 260 to 110 B.C., a series of strong leaders and generals, 

through military force, welded together a group of separate and highly 









the territory that would develop into the economically vital Silk Road.Chaotic Times in Chinese History
The entire later history of China was forged in the wars of the period 
from 260 to 110 B.C., yet it was not a single battle that marked 

these turning points; in each case, they were determined by longer 
military campaigns or even a series of wars. The heartland of China is a rough square measuring about 2,000 miles a side. This land is divided into northern and southern halves, 

each centered on one of the great basins of the Yangtze and Yellow 

rivers and each with its own distinctive climate and terrain. By 1700 
B.C., large, culturally sophisticated empires, such as the Shang 

dynasty, had emerged along the Yellow River. 
During a tumultuous 500-year period from 722 to 221 B.C., the core region of China fragmented into rival kingdoms that fought 

era is called the Spring and Autumn period, while the second half is 

the Warring States period. The famous military text 
The Art of War
, 
of warfare used in these chaotic times.46
Chinese Armies and Technology
Chariots played a central role in early Chinese warfare. They 
were technologically advanced, with excellent wheels that were 

qualities made them stronger, especially when taking sharp turns. 

By using parallel shafts and breast straps around the horse’s chest, 

rather than a pole-and-yoke arrangement and a neck strap, as in 

attached to the horses. The cab was large and typically held crew of three: a charioteer 
in the middle, an archer to one side, and a soldier armed with a 
halberd on the other. 

o This halberd was a distinctively Chinese weapon with a long 
shaft topped by a large bronze head that combined several 

cutting edges and spikes, one of which was at right angles to 
the shaft. o This weapon was held sticking out one side of the chariot parallel to the ground, where it would slice into infantry or 
potentially even sweep an enemy charioteer from his vehicle. 
Used in this way, it has no equivalent in Western warfare, 

wherein the main weapon of chariots was the bow. 
The era of chariot warfare in China witnessed some massive battles. For example, at the Battle of An in 589 B.C., at which the army of 

the state of Jin defeated their counterparts from Qi, the Jin forces 

included some 800 chariots. 
to a close with the introduction the crossbow around the beginning 
of the 4th century B.C. Powered by a cranking mechanism and 


to master, had a greater range than a bow, and could bring down 

elite charioteers or their horses at long distances. Soon, all Chinese 47armies incorporated large contingents of foot soldiers armed 
 with crossbows. At around the same time, horses began to be bred larger and could 

armies. Much more mobile and cost-effective than chariots, cavalry 

gradually took over the roles formerly played by chariots. In the 3rd century B.C., the Qin, one of the many squabbling kingdoms, 



No single decisive moment marked the ascension of the Qin. Between 364 and 234 B.C., the armies of Qin fought at least 15 

separate campaigns against their rivals in what amounted to an 
ongoing war of attrition. In 221 B.C., this series of conquests was Discovered in a series of burial pits near Xian, the terra-cotta warriors— Qin army.
© crystaltmc/iStock/Thinkstock.48

Shi Huangdi.The Chinese army of this era was primarily an infantry force made up of troops with several types of weapons. 
o The backbone of the infantry was issued the distinctive 
Chinese dagger-axe, supplemented by a bronze sword as a 

secondary weapon. 
o Flanking these heavy infantry formations were other contingents of foot soldiers carrying crossbows, who would 

o For armor, the better-equipped troops wore conical metal 
helmets and body armor made by lacing together small plates 
of toughened leather or metal. Most arms and armor were 
fashioned of bronze.Cavalry were mostly archers equipped with powerful 
 compound bows. 



5 men. Promotion depended on demonstrating skills, performance 
in battle, and mastery of texts on military theory, such as Sun Tzu’s 

famous Art of War
. The Chinese system offered rewards for those who personally 


of groups larger than 100 could earn promotion or rewards for the 

total number of enemies slain by the men under their command. The Han Empire 
The Qin Empire collapsed almost immediately upon the death of Shi Huangdi, but he had set the vital precedent of a united country 
that could not be erased. The group that stepped up to establish a 
49stable, long-lasting empire in China would be the Han dynasty, and 
they, too, would come to power by force of arms. 

Hsiang Yu, who represented the powerful southern kingdom of 

Chu. His opponent, representing the Han kingdom, was Liu Pang. 

With a constantly changing cast of allies, these two men fought a 

series of wars over the next several years, culminating in the Battle 
of Kai Hsia in 203 B.C. Hsiang Yu began the battle by leading a charge straight into the 
larger army of Liu Pang but found himself surrounded and his 




was immediately besieged by the Han-led army. 
Hsiang Yu determined that his best chance was to break out with 
as many of his elite troops as could be saved. He spent the night 
drinking and saying farewell to his wife, then mounted his favorite 
horse and led 800 of his cavalry in a desperate charge. 
The Han seem to have been taken by surprise; Hsiang broke through 
their lines and headed south, pursued by 5,000 of the Chu cavalry. 

After receiving some misdirections from a farmer, however, he rode 

into a swamp, and the Chu riders caught up and began picking off 

his men. Eventually, he was trapped on a hilltop with only 28 men left. 
Heroically leading his men in a counterattack, he managed once 
again to break free, killing more than 100 Chu enemies plus a 
general in the process.Hsiang now reached the banks of the Yangtze River, where a 
boatman offered to ferry him across to safety, but perhaps realizing 

that his fortunes would never recover, he refused, and he and his 

remaining companions turned to face the pursuing Han. Fighting 50


his own throat.With the death of Hsiang, Liu Pang completed his conquest of the 
main kingdoms. He now took the title of emperor and changed his 

Challenges to the HanThe Han dynasty was challenged by a dangerous confederation of northern nomads. These were the Xiong-nu, a group of tough and 

militant horse archers from the area of what is today Mongolia. In 200 B.C., Kao-ti led an expedition against the Xiong-nu that turned into a disaster. His army was surrounded by a horde of 

Xiong-nu. Unable to deal with the threat by military means, Kao-ti 
had to adopt a policy of appeasement, paying tribute to the nomads 
and providing hostages. In the aftermath, the Han undertook military reforms that placed a greater emphasis on the use of cavalry so that they could counter 
the mobility of the Xiong-nu with their own rapidly moving forces.By 130 B.C., the Han launched a series of aggressive raids against the Xiong-nu. The emperor who oversaw these campaigns was Wu-

ti; his subordinates managed to push back the Xiong-nu in a series 
of campaigns and secure the northern frontier. Because of these 

campaigns, China would permanently control the territories through 
which ran the eastern section of what would become known as the 
Silk Road. Li Ling against the Xiong-nuIn 99 B.C., the Chinese general Li Ling led 5,000 infantry into Mongolia, but through an apparent miscommunication, his 
supporting cavalry force did not arrive. Li Ling continued to 

advance and was surrounded at the Tien Shan Mountains by 30,000 

Xiong-nu horsemen. 51Undaunted, the Chinese infantry closed ranks, with men holding spears and shields in the front and crossbowmen behind. Wave after 

wave of charging Xiong-nu attacked this formation, but the Chinese 

held together, with the crossbowmen slowly but steadily shooting 

down the enemy cavalry. Finally, the Xiong-nu broke off, leaving 

Li Ling than organized his men in a mobile defensive formation 
and began the long march back to the Chinese border. Another army 

of at least 30,000 Xiong-nu now joined in and, for nearly a week, 
swarmed around the beleaguered Chinese, but with a stubborn 
series of rear-guard actions, Li Ling held them off and approached 

the frontier with about half his force remaining. Now the Chinese had to traverse a narrow gorge, and the Xiong-nu 
were able to block the route and roll boulders down on the Chinese, 


it safely across the border. At the last minute, Li Ling either was 

captured or voluntarily defected to the enemy, among whom he 

lived for the rest of his life. Cotterrell, Chariot.Peers, Soldiers of the Dragon.Portal, ed., The First Emperor
.Sawyer, 
Ancient Chinese Warfare
.Suggested Reading52
1. 
Who do you think would have won, and why, if the ancient Chinese Qin 
army had fought the Egyptians? What about the Greeks, Macedonians, 

and Romans?2. 
What qualities of the Xiong-nu made them such a persistent threat 
to China?Questions to Consider53636 Yarmouk & al-Qadisiyyah—Islam Triumphs
Lecture 8A


began to feel that something was terribly wrong. Throughout the 
day, individual soldiers, most of them wounded, had come seeking aid for 

their injuries from the battle taking place a few hundred yards away. But 







humiliated, the men turned and reengaged the Byzantines, pushing them 
back and reestablishing their lines.Competing Empires
Pressure from nomadic Germanic tribes, combined with a number of other factors, resulted in the political collapse of the western 
Roman Empire and its fragmentation into a host of barbarian 
kingdoms, many of which still continued to emulate the culture and 
model left by Rome. Meanwhile, the eastern half of the Roman Empire—the Byzantine 

emperors and controlled territory from Constantinople across 
all of modern Turkey and along the eastern coastline of the 

Mediterranean, even including Egypt. Further east, the Sassanid Empire encompassed eastern Syria and Mesopotamia and extended through the Caucasus into south central 
Asia, reaching all the way to the borders of India. Culturally and 
geographically, the Sassanians, a version of the old Persian Empire, 

created a golden age for Persian culture, and the empire was 
wealthy, vast, and powerful.
54Lecture 8: 636 Yarmouk & al-Qadisiyyah—Islam Triumphs
The OpponentsThe Byzantines and Sassanids fought a series of wars over the vital crossroads territories of Armenia and Syria. At the beginning 

of the 7th century, the Sassanian king won substantial territories, 
only to lose most of them to a counterattack by the Byzantine  

emperor, Heraclius.
During the next decade, a new power, within the span of a single 


Byzantines, then on the Sassanids. This new force was Islam, and within a century, Muslim armies 
would achieve one of the most impressive conquests of all time. 
More important, it would be one whose effects were among the 

The Battle of Yarmouk 
The Battle of Yarmouk was the culmination of several years’ clashes 
between Rashidun and Byzantine forces along the Mediterranean 
coastline. The Muslims had won most of these battles, and Heraclius 

realized that they were a serious threat. Deciding to wipe out the invaders, Heraclius assembled an army of 30,000 to 80,000 men under the overall command of an experienced 
Armenian general named Vahan. This army encamped in a strong 

position on a rocky plateau surrounded by steep but shallow gullies 
near the Yarmouk River. 
The Rashidun had been seeking a decisive battle; thus, their various small armies gathered into a force estimated at 15,000 to 30,000 
men—no more than half the size of the Byzantine army.
Tactical command of the Rashidun went to Khalid Ibn al Walid, an 
excellent tactician, who often used light cavalry to make dramatic 
55While the two armies confronted each other across the Yarmouk 
plain for nearly three months, reinforcements kept arriving on the 
Muslim side, eventually persuading the Byzantines to attack before 
they lost their heavy numerical advantage. Vahan drew up his forces in four large blocks stretching out over 

o The main body of each section was composed of a mass of infantry with a cavalry unit positioned behind. Vahan posted 

his best heavy infantry on the right to serve as anchor for the 
line. Vahan took up his place in the center.
o In addition, Vahan had a large number of Arabic auxiliaries and 

Khalid also organized his men into four large blocks, each opposing 
one of Vahan’s. Like the Byzantines’, the blocks were mainly 

infantry with small cavalry units behind them. However, Khalid 

also kept a large central reserve of cavalry to the rear under the 



combats occurred, in which champions from each side stepped out 
from the ranks and challenged one of the enemy to a one-on-one 

him, Vahan ordered some of his infantry forward, and skirmishing 

occurred along the line. 
push by the Byzantines, again along the entire front. Vahan’s 

strategy seems to have been to engage the main forces of the 
Rashidun in the center and drive forward on the right and left wings 
to envelop and surround them. As the day wore on, the plan started to work, but each of the four main sections of the Rashidun army had located its own camp 
directly behind the line, and as the right and left wings retreated, 56Lecture 8: 636 Yarmouk & al-Qadisiyyah—Islam Triumphs
they entered this zone of camps, where they encountered their infuriated wives. To shore up the crumbling left and right, Khalid now brought 

the rallying of the Rashidun infantry and counterattacks by the 
cavalry, the Byzantine advance was pushed back. By nightfall, the 

original battle lines were restored.On the third day, the Byzantines concentrated their offensive on the 

pushing the opposing Rashidun formations backward into their own 
camps, and again, the women refused defeat. Once more, Khalid’s 

timely insertion of the cavalry reserves resulted in the Byzantine 
offensive being blunted and forced back to its original line.
Vahan began the fourth day with another strong, generalized assault, 
which again had initial success. But when Khalid counterattacked 
with his cavalry reserve, the Byzantine infantry and cavalry lost 

contact. The cavalry were driven off to the north, exposing the 

infantry to harassing attacks by Khalid’s horsemen. The Rashidun 


the Byzantines back. 

small cavalry contingent drove into the rear lines of the Byzantine 
army, where they seized control of a bridge that constituted the only 

good crossing point over the treacherous gullies and ravines around 

off its supply line. 

however, sensing that the initiative was swinging in his favor, 

refused. These negotiations took up most of the day, and Khalid 

used the time to reorganize his remaining cavalry into one large 

strike force.57
offensive. His infantry forces surged forward along the length of 





Byzantine lines. Vahan attempted to counter with his own cavalry 

but was too slow in deploying them. As the Byzantines began to retreat, they backed into a funnel-shaped peninsula, and the constricted units began to panic and lose 
cohesion. The defeat turned into a rout. The brilliant Khalid had 

played the Byzantines perfectly, blunting their brute-force assaults 

with his well-timed cavalry charges until they became exhausted, 

then striking back with a single, powerful blow that won the battle.Outcomes of Yarmouk 
Yarmouk was a truly decisive battle. After it, the Byzantines made 
no further major attempts to oppose the Rashidun armies in Syria 
and basically ceded the entire eastern Mediterranean to them. All 

of Egypt, Palestine, and Syria easily fell to Muslim forces within a 
few years. The Byzantines retreated into Anatolia and, later, to the walls of 


out for another 1,000 years, but their broader empire was gone. Yarmouk was the moment when the future of the Middle East was 
determined. Until that point, the dominant culture had been Greco–
Roman. Today, all the countries in the region (with the exception of 

Israel) are predominantly Arabic-speaking and Muslim. 
The Battle of al-QadisiyyahShortly after Yarmouk, the Battle of al-Qadisiyyah in southern 
Iraq, 
 lasting effects. 
The Rashidun army was about 15,000 to 30,000 men, among them 5,000 veterans of Yarmouk.
58Lecture 8: 636 Yarmouk & al-Qadisiyyah—Islam Triumphs
The Sassanian army of 30,000 to 60,000 boasted a number of especially dangerous units, including a substantial corps of trained 
war elephants imported from India. The Sassanians were renowned 

for their excellent cavalry, especially a group of elite heavy cavalry 

who were covered from head to foot in scaled metal armor and 
whose horses were protected with metal scales, as well. 
battle, but the general pattern of the Muslim line fending off a series 

of enemy frontal charges day after day was the same. Finally, the 


forces broke the Sassanian formation and won the battle. Just as Yarmouk resulted in dramatic and permanent changes to the 
culture, language, and religion of the eastern Mediterranean, so, 

religion were wiped away, replaced with Islam. The old Persian 

language and culture were blended with new Arabic elements. 
It is not an overstatement to say that, in cultural, linguistic, and religious terms, the map of the modern Middle East was drawn in 
the early 7th century A.D. The present (and the future) of the region 

Donner, 
The Early Islamic Conquests. Farrokh, Shadows in the Desert.Haldon, Byzantium at War, AD 600–1453
. The History of al-Tabari
, vols. 11 (
Blankinship, trans.) and 12 
 (Friedmann, trans.). Nicolle, Yarmuk 636 AD
. Suggested Reading591. 
What key factors contributed to the success of the Arabic armies at 
Yarmouk and al-Qadisiyyah?
2. 
Do you think Yarmouk or al-Qadisiyyah was the more decisive battle, 

and why?Questions to Consider60Lecture 9: 751 Talas & 1192 Tarain—Islam into Asia
751 Talas & 1192 Tarain—Islam into Asia
Lecture 9Sports fans and military history enthusiasts share an obsession for arguing about the outcome of hypothetical confrontations between 

opponents from different times or places. For military history buffs, 
these arguments often focus on such questions as: What would have 

happened if an ancient Chinese army had fought Alexander’s Macedonians? 

One major battle was actually fought between a Chinese army and a western 
one—the Battle of the Talas River in 751 A.D., which matched an army of 

the Tang dynasty against an Arabic army of the Abbasid caliphate. The Battle 

of Tarain was another interesting clash of widely differing civilizations and 

empires—in this case, a 12th-century invasion of Hindu Rajput India by a Turkish Islamic army. 
The Tang Dynasty
The Tang dynasty constituted one of China’s golden ages. From the 
early 7th century and for the next 300 years, the Tang ruled from 
their capital city of Chang’an (modern Xi’an), which became a great 
cultural metropolis, larger and more technologically sophisticated 

than its European counterparts. 
o By the early 700s, Chang’an had a population approaching 
a million and may have been the largest city in the world at 

that point. 
o 
of the Tang. As the terminus of the Silk Road, it was a node 

of trade in whose vast markets goods from east and west were 
bought and sold.  The Tang pursued an aggressive expansionist policy, and China’s 
borders stretched west into central Asia and south into Vietnam. 

Along the Silk Road, they had established control over the  Tarim Basin. 
61
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Uzbekistan overlap to the east of 

Tashkent. In the late 740s, this was the zone of operations of an 

enterprising Chinese general named Gao Hsien-Chih, the Tang 

commander at the Battle of the Talas River. 
The AbbasidsMeanwhile, a new power was making its presence known in the area: the Abbasid caliphate. Much like the Tang dynasty, 

the Abbasid caliphate was an aggressive, expansionist empire 

Under the Abbasids, the city of Baghdad became a great center of 
culture, much like Chang’an. In 750, the establishment of Baghdad 
as the Abbasid capital was yet in the future, but the Abbasid armies 

were pushing ever eastward toward central Asia and India. 
The Arabic armies still possessed strong momentum from their 
initial wave of conquests of the eastern and southern Mediterranean. 


inevitable: they were both new, vigorous empires, looking to 


Battle of the Talas River
The incident that led directly to the Battle of the Talas River 
concerned some petty central Asian kingdoms. The rulers of 

Ferghana and Tashkent were feuding, and the king of Ferghana 


Tashkent, in turn, sought aid from the Abbasids, and both the 

Chinese and the Abbasids responded by dispatching armies. 

standard formation, with a line of archers in front, the spear men 
drawn up behind them, and the heavy cavalry to the rear. In addition, 

there were lightly armed skirmishers and a cavalry reserve. 62Lecture 9: 751 Talas & 1192 Tarain—Islam into Asia
According to Chinese sources, the turning point in the battle 

the side of the Chinese, switched sides during the battle and attacked 

together, but most were slaughtered or captured, and supposedly 

only 2,000 returned to China.The Battle of the Talas River set the high-water mark of Tang 
expansion to the west, effectively marking the end of Chinese 


At the time of the battle, the people of central Asia followed a 
variety of religions, but over the next few centuries, they became 
almost exclusively Muslim. Some historians have argued that 

the battle was decisive not only because it stopped the spread of 
Chinese power westward, but because it determined the permanent 
religious orientation of the entire area. Rajput versus Turk 
Conversion to Islam after the Battle of the Talas River was a 
process that took several hundred years. Among the groups that 

converted were the warlike Turkish tribes of the steppe, who were 

outstanding horsemen and archers, and in the 11
th century, several 
energetic Turkish leaders used these martial skills to carve out 

substantial empires. 
The most famous of these was Mahmud of Ghazni, who built an empire based in what today is Afghanistan and extending into Iran 

and Pakistan. Mahmud led 16 raids into northern India, where 
his zeal for destroying Hindu temples and statues earned him the 
nickname “Idol Breaker.” 
Mahmud’s empire was supplanted by a pair of brothers from 
Ghor. One established himself on the throne of Ghazni, while the 

other, Mohamad of Ghor, looked southward to India to carve out 

his own kingdom. 
63In northern and central India, the Rajput kingdoms dominated 
and frequently fought each other. Rajput warfare emphasized 

large masses of conscript infantry coupled with war elephants. 

They did use cavalry, but this was a lesser arm of the military 

and was hampered by lack of the excellent horses available 

across the mountains. 
One of the prominent northern Indian Rajput kingdoms was ruled 
controlled a large territory based around the cities of Ajmer and 

Delhi. The main invasion route into India from Afghanistan led 

directly through Prithvi-raja’s territory; thus, in the late 12
th century, 
Prithvi-raja and Mohamad of Ghor were on a collision course.The First Battle of Tarain
In 1191, Mohamad led a large army south into India and seized 
the fortress of Bhatinda. Prithvi-raja summoned his conscripts 
and moved to intercept Mohamad. The armies met at a site called 

Tarain, just north of Delhi. 
The available sources claim that Prithvi-raja’s army numbered 
200,000, with 3,000 elephants, and that Mohamad’s was 

considerably smaller. The actual numbers are probably less than 

half of these, but it does seem that Mohamad’s army was much 

smaller, although more professional. 
Prithvi-raja’s forces charged enthusiastically forward, seeking to 
crush and envelop Mohamad’s army by sheer weight of numbers. 

Mohamad was wounded severely enough that he had to leave the 

Tarain ended as a victory for Prithvi-raja, but not a decisive one.
It is interesting to compare how the two leaders responded to  this battle. 
o Mohamad organized a new army with a greater emphasis on 
mobile horsemen and discipline. He purged his army of any 
64Lecture 9: 751 Talas & 1192 Tarain—Islam into Asia
who had shown cowardice, increased training, and obtained more horses. o In contrast, the only action taken by Prithvi-raja  to prepare for 
the rematch was to secure agreements from other Rajput rulers 
to assist him, ensuring that his army would be even larger.
The Second Battle of Tarain 
In 1192, Mohamad returned, and Prithvi-raja moved to meet him 
with an army said to be more than 300,000 strong. They met 
 on almost the 
same spot, but this 
battle would have a  Mohamad divided his 

including four with 
10,000 light cavalry each, 
armed mainly with bows. 
The last was a division of 
12,000 heavily armored 
horsemen. His plan was 
clever:
o The four horse archer divisions 
were to advance and 

retreat repeatedly, all the while raining arrows down on the 

Rajput ranks. If attacked, they were to fall back and not engage 
in close combat. o If one division was being pursued with determination by a unit of the Rajputs, it should retreat, but the other three archer 

up the pursuit. In the aftermath of the First Battle of Tarain, Prithvi-raja showed 

complacency, assuming that his forces 

had already proved their superiority.
© Magog the Ogre/Wikimedia Commons/CC BY-SA 3.0.
65o With their inferior cavalry and slower horses, the Rajputs 
would not be able to chase their opponents very far, and 

Mohamad’s horse archers would once again turn, charge, and 

The plan took advantage of the strengths of Mohamad’s army 
and exploited the weaknesses of the Rajput. It was also a classic 
confrontation between a smaller, highly disciplined force that used 

hit-and-run tactics and a large, unwieldy one that relied on brute 

force and numbers. Finally, Mohamad ordered a general retreat, his men pretending that 

took the bait and rushed headlong after their apparently running 
foes, losing cohesion in their own ranks in their eagerness to get at 
their tormentors. This was the moment Mohamad had been waiting for; he ordered into battle his reserve division of 12,000 heavily armored horsemen. 
They smashed into the disordered Rajput ranks and began slashing 
with their swords. The other four divisions wheeled back to join the 

slaughter, and the battle became a bloody rout. 
Outcomes With this victory and several follow-up campaigns, Mohamad of 
Ghor took control of many of the cities and kingdoms of northern 
India, including Ajmer and Delhi, establishing a permanent Muslim 


monarchs in Delhi that would rule until they were deposed by 
Mongol invaders in 1290. The Second Battle of Tarain was a decisive one in world history 
because it secured a permanent Muslim presence in India. For the 
next 800 years, up to the 21st century, there would be tension and 
sometimes outright war between Hindus and Muslims. 66Lecture 9: 751 Talas & 1192 Tarain—Islam into Asia
When India achieved independence from British rule in 1948, these tensions resulted in the establishment of Muslim Pakistan as 
separate from predominantly Hindu India, a national rivalry that 


Dunlop, “A New Source of Information on the Battle of Talas or Atlakh.”
Joglekar, 
Decisive Battles That India Lost.Peers, Soldiers of the Dragon.Sandhu, A Military History of Medieval India
. Verma and Verma, 
Decisive Battles of India through the Ages
.1. 
What do you think would have been the long-term historical consequences if the Tang had won the Battle of the Talas River?
2. 
How do you think the army of Mohamad of Ghor would compare with 
the other armies we have studied thus far in the course?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider671066 Hastings—William Conquers England
Lecture 10In England during the 11
th century, it was common for famous people 
to be given nicknames, often visually descriptive, to distinguish them 
from others with the same name. Thus, one man was called Harold 
Fairhair; another, Harold Bluetooth. Sometimes, the nicknames indicated 

aspects of their character or personality, such as Robert the Pius. Perhaps 

the most unfortunately named was William the Bastard, a son of Robert 



nickname, crossed the English Channel in 1066 with an invasion force, 
won the Battle of Hastings, and conquered England. His victory not only 
changed the course of English and world history, but it also earned him a 


English Succession Problem 
In England, 1066 began with the death of King Edward the Confessor. His demise created a succession crisis, out of which four 

claimants emerged: 

o Harold Godwinson, a relative of Edward’s wife, was from a 
powerful family that controlled much English territory, and 

Edward may have made a deathbed acknowledgment of him. o The king of Denmark traced his descent from Cnut, an earlier king of England. o King Harald Hadrada of Norway was eagerly looking to extend his power over more territory. 
o William of Normandy was supposedly promised the English 
throne by Edward the Confessor when William visited in 1052. 
Several sources assert that when Harold visited Normandy in 1063, he swore an oath that he would recognize and support William as 

heir to the English throne. 68Lecture 10: 1066 Hastings—William Conquers England
In the short term, Harold took the throne of England, but Harald Hadrada and William of Normandy were determined to contest his 

claim by force of arms.The OpponentsHarold summoned his supporters and retainers, the professional core of his army. He also called out the fyrd, a general summons 

somewhat like a militia. By late summer, Harold had gathered 

these forces in southern England near the coast, in anticipation of 
William’s landing. 
Meanwhile, William began mustering his troops and constructing 
ships, but weather and other factors delayed him. By early 
September, Harold’s men were running low on provisions and the 

mandated tour of duty for the fyrdmen was expiring. He had to 
begin disbanding his army.
Just then, Harald Hadrada landed a force of 300 to 500 ships in northern England, moved inland, and captured York. 
Harold Godwinson acted swiftly, recalling his troops and covering 


main Norse army at Stamford Bridge. The Battle of Stamford Bridge was hard-fought. Hadrada was eventually struck down by an arrow that pierced his windpipe, but 
the Norsemen fought on even after their king was slain, bolstered 
by the arrival of reinforcements from their ships. In the end, the English prevailed, but both sides suffered heavy 
casualties. Some have claimed the Battle of Stamford Bridge as 
one of the key battles in world history, an argument that has some 


in England that might have oriented England toward Scandinavia 
rather than the European mainland.69A few days later, word came that William had taken advantage of 
Harold’s absence to cross the channel and land his army, organizing 

his forces on a road that led to London in the peninsula near 
Hastings, where his army could be resupplied by sea. 
paused for several days to assemble more troops. On October 13, 
Harold camped within a few miles of William, and both armies 

prepared to do battle the next day.
The Armies and Their Technology
The arms, tactics, and equipment of Harold’s Anglo-Saxon army 
and William’s Norman army shared much in common: 

o The wealthier warriors on both sides would have worn long shirts of chain mail or scale armor with long vertical slits 
extending up from the bottom edge to allow horseback riding, 
often augmented by a 
mail coif that went over 
the head. o Both sides carried wooden shields with 
a metal boss and rim 
that were either circular 

or round on top, then 
tapered to a point at 
the bottom, a design 
especially handy for 
cavalry use. o Both sides favored straight, long, double-
edged swords, designed 
for slashing attacks. 
Javelins and thrusting 
spears were also popular 
weapons. 
our best sources of information 
regarding the arms and armor  
used by both sides at the Battle  
of Hastings.© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock. 70Lecture 10: 1066 Hastings—William Conquers England
o In the Bayeux Tapestry, men of both sides are shown wearing 
conical helmets, usually augmented with a nasal bar extending 
down from the helmet rim, although this style of helmet is 
more often associated with the Normans. Although the size of the Norman army is uncertain, the best guess is that there were about 2,000 horsemen, 4,000 infantry, and 1,500 

archers and crossbowmen. A weapon popular among Anglo-Saxon warriors was the axe. It 
came in two varieties: a small, hatchet-like design that was thrown 
and a larger, heavy axe with an asymmetrical head whose bottom 

edge was longer than the top, used with two hands.Harold’s force is estimated to have been slightly larger than 
William’s and to have been composed of roughly one-third semi-

professional warriors and two-thirds fyrdmen. The Battle On October 14, 1066, William moved out with his men, heading 


enemy had been sighted, and William deployed his men for battle. 


hill about 700 meters long whose sides were protected by gullies, 
Harold placed his most heavily armored men in front, forming a solid shield wall backed up by the lesser warriors and fyrdmen. 
This formation, thought to have been perhaps 10 men deep, 

stretched along the entire length of the ridge. Harold himself took 
up a position in the center, just to the rear of the phalanx. 
71The Normans deployed on the low ground within about 200 meters of the English shield wall. In front was a thin screen of archers and 
crossbowmen, then a block of infantry, and the cavalry in the rear. 

William, like Harold, placed himself in the center, just behind the 

main lines. 


English front row would merely have raised their shields until the 
barrage was over. 
William next ordered a general advance, and his line attacked the 
English shield wall. There was bitter close combat all along the line, 

with the English hacking with swords and axes while the Normans 
Having been ordered to support the infantry, the Norman horsemen 
could not gain much momentum, but their role was to exploit 
holes in the enemy formation made by their infantry. Despite this 


attempts to penetrate it.The Norman left began to retreat down the slope. Some of the English fyrdmen, believing the enemy was routed, surged forward 

in pursuit. This was dangerous, exposing the center to a potential 




the ranks that William had been killed. 
Here was the crisis point of the battle: William’s army was now 

 quickly and decisively. 

o William either removed his helmet or pushed it back so that his 
face was clearly visible, and his men could see that he still lived. 
o 
72Lecture 10: 1066 Hastings—William Conquers England
o William himself gathered a group of his knights and charged 
with them into the mob of advancing Englishmen. The counterattack was effective, and the English troops were cut 
off and slaughtered.
William ordered his troops back up the hill, and the close-range 

of charging and pretending to retreat, in the hope of drawing the 

English out of their organized formation on the ridge. 
The ranks of the English were beginning to thin, with many of the more experienced and better armed soldiers having been killed or 

wounded and their places in the front rank taken by the less well-
equipped militia and fyrdmen. William began one more major effort 

with a barrage of arrows and another general charge up the hill. 
This time, the arrows had a more deadly effect on the now inferior 
English troops, and one arrow apparently struck Harold in the face 
or eye. Accounts differ as to whether this wound was immediately 

fatal, but he dropped to the ground. Meanwhile, William’s men advanced around the edges of the 





the Normans crested the hill and slaughtered the remnants.Outcomes On Christmas Day, William was crowned in Westminster Cathedral, 


eliminating the Viking threat and winnowing the ranks of those 

who might have opposed him. The Norman Conquest blended Anglo-Saxon and Norman culture 
and reoriented England from Scandinavia to the European mainland. 
73In particular, it strengthened the ties between England and France 
and ensured that England would be embroiled in continental affairs. 
It could even be argued that the Battle of Hastings marked the 
beginning of England’s rise in world affairs, culminating in the 19
th-century British Empire.Bradbury, 
The Battle of Hastings.Bruce, The Bayeux Tapestry
.Gravett, Hastings 1066.1. 
Who do you think had the most legitimate claim to the English throne: William the Bastard, Harold Godwinson, Harald Hadrada, or the king 

of Norway?2. 
To what degree do you believe that William’s victory was due to the 

lucky arrow hit that killed Harold?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider74Lecture 11: 1187 Hattin—Crusader Desert Disaster
1187 Hattin—Crusader Desert Disaster
Lecture 11
Thirty years after the Battle of Hastings, Pope Urban II gave one of 

years and involved all the major powers of Europe and the Near East. This 



kingdoms of the Near East by the Christian kingdoms of Europe. Although 

the Crusades extended over a 200-year span, the turning point was the Battle 
of Hattin in 1187. The opposing forces seem evenly matched, but squabbling 

among their leadership and a series of poor decisions ultimately doomed the 

European army to a miserable and dusty death.The Crusades up to Hattin The enthusiastic response to the Pope’s call for an expedition to 
free the Holy Land from the “pagans” was probably much greater 

number of countries volunteered. Enlisting was called “taking the cross” because strips of cloth in the shape of a cross were sewn onto enlistees’ clothes or painted on 

their shields. It was from this practice that they became known as 
Crusaders and the entire movement was called the Crusades. 
1097. After a siege, Antioch fell, and the Crusaders marched 

down the coast, winning a string of victories. Eventually, they 

reached Jerusalem itself, and after another siege, in July of 1099, 
the Crusaders burst into the holy city and massacred many of  the inhabitants. A number of small Crusader kingdoms were established along the 
eastern coast of the Mediterranean, the most important of which 
was the Kingdom of Jerusalem. 75From the European perspective, the First Crusade had been a spectacular success, exceeding all of its goals in just a few years. 
establishment of Christian 
military religious orders, the 
Knights Hospitaller and the 
Knights Templar, which grew 

into powerful, independent 
political and military forces 
whose members took religious 
vows but were trained 
as knights. They quickly 

acquired a large number of 

key castles and strongholds 
scattered around the various 
Crusader kingdoms and, 
because they represented a 
permanent, professional core 


became important factors 
in the overall history of  the Crusades. The politics of this era are a confusing muddle of ever-

shifting treaties between and among the small Christian kingdoms, 
the various Islamic states and their subfactions, the militant orders, 
the European kingdoms, and the pope. Periodically, a new wave of Crusaders would arrive from Europe, 
whose allegiance to either the existing Crusader states or their home 
countries was questionable and who often did not feel constrained 
by existing treaties or alliances. The lines of military and political command were often muddy or disputed. Rivals might temporarily join forces to achieve a 
Motivations for joining the Crusade have been widely debated; some 
Crusaders hoped to acquire 
territory in the Holy Lands, while 
others were drawn by the chance to 
earn remission for their sins.© Getty Images/Photos.com/Jupiterimages/Thinkstock. 76Lecture 11: 1187 Hattin—Crusader Desert Disaster
desired end, but almost all major campaigns were fought by uneasy coalitions with divided and often antagonistic leadership. This lack 



caused problems for the Crusaders and hampered the effectiveness 

of their military initiatives.This stalemate continued for nearly 100 years. Then, in the late 
12th century, a new Islamic leader emerged who would begin to tilt 
the balance in favor of the Muslims. He is known in the West as 

Saladin or, more correctly in Arabic, Salah-huddeen. The turning 

point of the Crusades, and one of Saladin’s greatest victories, was 

the Battle of Hattin in 1187.
Leaders and Armies 
Saladin played an active role in the struggle for control over Egypt and eventually became its de facto ruler. From this base, he 

extended his power north, bypassing the Crusader kingdoms along 
the coast but gaining control over Damascus and much of Syria  and Palestine. Saladin’s armies were a mixture of Muslim Turks, Arabs, and 
Kurds, most of whom were fairly professional soldiers, with a high 
proportion of skilled horsemen. Standard equipment included bows, 
lances, spears, and swords. Many of Saladin’s warriors were well protected with metal helmets, 
mail hauberks, substantial shields, and lamellar armor. At Hattin, 

Saladin probably commanded a force roughly equal in size to that 
of the Crusaders—around 30,000.In 1186, the Crusaders faced a leadership crisis. 
o Baldwin IV had appointed Raymond of Tripoli, an able 
commander, to serve as regent and rule the kingdom after 

his death. A captive for eight years in Aleppo, Raymond was 



willing to explore peaceful coexistence. 77o Guy de Lusignan was the choice of a group of nobles who favored a hostile approach to the Muslims and staged a coup at 
court in which Raymond was ousted.o Reynald of Chatillon, like Raymond, was a skilled military commander and had been a captive in Aleppo for many years. 

The experience had left Reynald an implacable foe of the 
Muslims and a forceful member of the pro-war faction. Making up the majority of the Christian forces were various men-at-arms, both mounted and on foot, equipped with an array of 
weapons and armor, ranging from leather jerkins to mail hauberks, 

and bearing swords, axes, spears, bows, and polearms. The Hattin Campaign In 1187, a truce was in effect between Saladin and the Kingdom 
of Jerusalem, but Reynald continued to raid Muslim caravans of 
merchants and religious pilgrims—plainly a breach of the truce. 
Saladin began assembling an army. 
One contingent of Saladin’s army annihilated a Christian 
force at the Springs of Cresson that included several hundred 

Hospitallers and Templars. Although this battle itself was 


because the heavy losses incurred deprived the Christians of 

some of their most dependable forces.The various Christian factions temporarily shelved their differences 
and united under King Guy of Jerusalem. It was an uneasy alliance, 
with much bickering and resentments among the leaders. Guy 
ignored Raymond’s advice against marching to relieve Saladin’s 

siege of the city of Tiberias; Raymond had pointed out that the road 

to Tiberias lacked both water and fodder for the horses.
The army traveled in several separate divisions, but each division assumed a similar formation, with the cavalry in the center, 

surrounded and protected by a hollow square of infantry. King 
78Lecture 11: 1187 Hattin—Crusader Desert Disaster
Guy was with the center group, which carried the most valuable Christian religious artifact, a cross alleged to be the one on which 
The soldiers literally baked in their armor, choked on the dust 
clouds raised by thousands of marching feet, and suffered 

tremendous thirst from the severely restricted water rations. Adding 

to the discomfort were harassing raids by Saladin’s forces, which 

increased in intensity over the course of the day. 
By the afternoon, Guy determined to alter the direction of the march toward the nearby springs of Hattin, beyond which lay the Lake of 
Tiberias. Knowing that keeping the Christian army from reaching 

either of these water sources would be a great advantage, Saladin 
ordered a detachment of his more mobile army to hurry around and 
block the road. In contrast to the dismal conditions in the parched Christian camp, Saladin’s army settled down for the night in high spirits. 

o Fresh sheaves of arrows were distributed to all the archers, and 70 camels carrying more arrows were organized to supply 

fresh ammunition wherever it might be needed. o A relay of more camels brought water from Lake Tiberias in 
goatskin bags so that everyone had plenty to drink. o 
undergrowth and sticks into bundles positioned along the 

windward side of the Christians’ anticipated line of march. 
On July 4, the weary Christian army dragged toward the springs of Hattin, a couple of miles from the vanguard. To increase their 

discomfort and confusion, Saladin’s men ignited the gathered 

brush, enveloping Guy’s men in choking clouds of smoke. 
Saladin then launched a general attack. The battle now coalesced 
around the embattled Christian survivors atop the Horns of Hattin. 79In the end, they were overrun, and most of the knights surrendered. The prisoners included nearly every major Christian leader. 
Outcomes Hattin was a crushing defeat for the Crusader kingdoms. The main 

lost. Not only was it a disaster in material terms, but it was also a 
devastating and humiliating psychological blow. 
Riding the momentum of his decisive victory, Saladin swiftly 
moved to capture many of the largest Crusader cities. Acre quickly 

fell, freeing 4,000 Muslim slaves and prisoners. By the end of the 
campaign, they would be joined by 15,000 more, while close to 
100,000 Christians would be captured. Saladin began his siege of Jerusalem on September 20, using a sophisticated array of catapults and siege towers to bombard the 

city and its defenders. Seeing little hope for survival, the leaders of 

Jerusalem negotiated a surrender, agreeing to leave the city and pay 

a sizable ransom. On October 2, Saladin took possession. He would 
continue to rule until his death in 1193.
Most of the history of the Crusades from this point on is a story of failures and attempts to cling to the cities remaining in Christian 
hands. In the end, all the Crusader kingdoms were destroyed and all 
Christian outposts in the region were lost. 
they helped to initiate the exchange of information and technology 

Europe and may even have helped prompt the Renaissance. 80Kedar, ed., 
The Horns of Hattin.Nicolle, Hattin 1187
.Riley-Smith, The Crusades.1. 
Do you think the Crusades were ultimately doomed to failure because of logistics and other factors, or might the Crusaders have established 
permanent kingdoms in the Holy Lands?2. 
What factors contributed to the Crusaders’ defeat at Hattin, and which 

one was the most important?Lecture 11: 1187 Hattin—Crusader Desert Disaster
Questions to ConsiderSuggested Reading811260 Ain Jalut—Can the Mongols Be Stopped?
Lecture 12What do these warriors have in common: a tribesman wielding 
a blowgun and poisoned darts on the island of Java; a German 


a member of the fanatical Ismaili Muslim sect known as the Assassins, 

living in a mountain fortress in Syria; a Japanese samurai raised to follow 

the bushido code; a tough Afghan tribesman serving the sultan of Delhi in 

northern India; a Mamluk warrior of Egypt; a soldier of the Song dynasty 

in China; a Russian lord in Novgorod; and a Burmese war-elephant 

driver? The answer: Within just a few decades, all fought against the same 

enemy—the Mongols.Great Conquerors 
The Mongols were arguably the greatest conquerors of all time. In 
three generations, they burst out of their homeland and swept across 
Europe and Asia, conquering every empire and civilization they 

encountered. By the end, their dominion stretched nearly 10,000 
miles and constituted the largest contiguous land empire in history. 
The Mongols are notable for the astonishing diversity of their enemies, the range of environments in which they fought, and the 
different styles of warfare they outmatched. 

o The stereotypical Mongol warrior is a swift-moving nomadic horse archer, but many of their greatest successes resulted from 

mastery of siege warfare. From Syria to Korea, they captured 
walled cities and fortresses that were said to be impregnable by 
creatively employing a wide range of high-tech siege engines 
and weapons. o 
amphibious invasions seen before the 20th century. 
82Lecture 12: 1260 Ain Jalut—Can the Mongols Be Stopped?
o They were highly adaptable, quickly applying any new technology that seemed useful. When they had trouble 


they imported counterweight trebuchets from the west, manned 
by Muslim artillerymen. o When they attacked castles in Syria, they brought giant siege 
crossbows developed in China. From China, they also learned 

the use of explosives, which they employed both as weapons 



to Europe.There was one notable instance, however, when a Mongol invasion 
was permanently stopped by a clear-cut defeat in open battle. This 



the Battle of Ain Jalut in 1260. 
The Opponents
of Temujin, a middle son of a tribal chieftain, trained to be an 

outstanding horseman and archer, able to endure harsh conditions 

and frequent deprivation. By adulthood, Temujin had accomplished the impressive feat of 
uniting the main Mongol tribes into a single fearsome horde. In 

recognition of his supreme leadership, in 1206, he received the name 

by which he would become mostly widely known: Genghis Khan. 

dispatched them to subdue a neighboring rival state in northwest 
China and to attack the great central Asian power of the day, the 

Muslim Khwarazm Empire (based in today’s Iran and Afghanistan), 

greatly extending Mongol power. 
The Mongol conquest of China started with the northern Jin 
83Another Mongol army invaded Eastern Europe and wiped out an entire army of heavily armored Russian knights. Genghis Khan died in 1227, having appointed as successor one of his sons, Ogedei, who continued his policies. 
o Under Ogedei, the Mongols completed the defeat of Jin China, taking Jin’s southern capital after an epic siege and moving on 

to invade Korea.o They began driving deep into southern China, ruled by the Song dynasty. 
o In central Asia, they conquered Georgia and Armenia and 
continued south into Kashmir and northern India. o They returned to Europe, overrunning much of Russia and Poland and moving toward Germany and Hungary. This attack 

was cut short when Ogedei died in 1241. If the Mongols were unusually tough warriors, their opponents at Ain 
Jalut, the Egyptian Mamluks, were similarly skilled. The Mamluk 

warrior class was an interesting phenomenon of the Muslim world, 
in which young slave boys, originally mostly of Turkic ethnicity, 

were raised in what amounted to military academies and trained to 
be highly professional and dedicated warriors. Despite their technical condition as slaves, Mamluks enjoyed fairly 
power. During a time of internal turmoil in Egypt around 1250, 

they seized control, establishing the Mamluk sultanate. The third 

Mamluk sultan, the man who would confront the Mongols at Ain 

Jalut, was Qutuz.The Prelude 
The origins of Ain Jalut can be found in the scheme of Mongke 
Khan (a grandson of Genghis) for world conquest. This plan 

involved dispatching Mongke’s brother Hulegu to complete the 
84Lecture 12: 1260 Ain Jalut—Can the Mongols Be Stopped?
subjugation of Persia, to eliminate the Assassins, and to obtain the 
submission of the main Islamic caliphates or, if they would not 

yield, to conquer them. 
surrender of various minor principalities, some of which supplied 
troops to augment his army. He besieged and captured dozens of 

the mountain fortresses of the Assassins, thought to be invulnerable 

because of their location. Hulegu then turned to the subjugation of the Islamic caliphates. The oldest and most prestigious of these was the Abbasid, based in 

Baghdad, whose current caliph believed that his religious authority 
would be enough to deter the invaders. In 1258, after a brief siege, 
the Mongols used their catapults to destroy one of the city’s towers 

and poured into the breach.In 1259, Aleppo was taken by storm. Damascus capitulated soon 
after, and for all practical purposes, the Ayyubid caliphate toppled. 

Now the sole remaining major independent Muslim power in the 
region was the Mamluk sultanate of Egypt.The BattleJust as Hulegu was preparing to take his army south and crush the Mamluk sultanate as he had crushed the Abbasids and Ayyubids, 

Mongke Khan died. Hulegu determined to return and participate in 
the selection of the next Great Khan, as was Mongol custom. He 
also decided to take the majority of his army with him. Mindful of 
his mission, however, he left behind a force of about 20,000 men 

under the control of his most trusted general, Kitbuqa, to mop up 
the remaining resistance in the area. Meanwhile, in Egypt, Qutuz, the Mamluk warlord, had been preparing his forces to confront the Mongols as soon as it 
became apparent that they were intent on invading. Now, with 

the withdrawal of the majority of the Mongol army, Qutuz saw an 

opportunity to attack the smaller contingent before reinforcements 85could arrive. He resolved to meet the Mongols before they reached Egypt, while their numbers were at a minimum. A wild card was the Crusader kingdoms. Although Jerusalem had 
been lost a half century earlier, the remnants of the kingdoms 

collectively constituted an appreciable force. They were the 

enemies of the Mamluks; accordingly, some Crusaders aligned 

themselves with the Mongols. But the majority were so alarmed 

informing their old foes that they would be allowed to march 
through Crusader territory without opposition and even agreeing to 
help supply the Mamluk army. 
Qutuz augmented his forces through uneasy alliance with 
one of his former rivals, Baybars, who had gained a good 


commander and an ambitious man; thus, for Qutuz, this alliance 

brought considerable risks. Yet together, the two men commanded 

a force roughly equivalent to, or even slightly greater than, 

Kitbuqa’s Mongols. The two armies met at the springs of Ain 

Jalut in modern Israel, only about 15 miles southwest of where the 

Battle of Hattin had taken place.Baybars went ahead with an advance force and skirmished with the Mongols, sending word back to Qutuz to bring up the army. 

The battle took place on September 3, 1260. It appears that 
Baybars employed some of the deceptive tactics that the Mongols 
themselves typically used in battle. Over the course of the morning, 
the Mongols pressed aggressively forward, perhaps lured by 
feigned retreats. The Mongol assaults seem to have been especially heavy on the Mamluk left, and this section of Qutuz’s army began to fall back 

for real and lose cohesion. They were temporarily rallied by a 

counterattack, but then the Mongols drove forward again and 
seemed on the verge of breaking through. 
86Lecture 12: 1260 Ain Jalut—Can the Mongols Be Stopped?
Sensing a crisis point, Qutuz personally led another counterattack 

now closed in a deadly embrace. This must have been an especially 


who were similarly armed, used the same tactics, and were equally 
Sometime during this clash, Kitbuqa was slain or captured, 
executed, and the Mongols’ line broke. The Mongol army split 

into several groups that met various fates. Some made a stand 

on a hill and were killed by 





they were burned out; and a 

sizable contingent escaped to 

the north. 
Qutuz was not to enjoy his success for long. He entered 
Damascus in triumph and 
headed south to return to 
Egypt. Somewhere along the 
road, he was assassinated 
by a group of his own 
commanders. Baybars was 
appointed the new sultan. 
His heirs would complete 
the process of expelling  the Crusaders.Outcomes Ain Jalut is a decisive battle for three reasons. First, it stopped the 

given that most of the Western powers had proven vulnerable to the 


armies rolling across Europe and the Mediterranean. The Mongols were likely somewhat surprised by the stubborn 
resistance of the Mamluk warriors, 
who were just as tough and well-
trained as their opponents.© PHGCOM/Wikimedia Commons/CC BY-SA 3.0.
87Second, it ensured the survival of the Islamic states, which would rebound from the Mongol incursions to control most of the region. Finally, it shattered the image of the Mongols as unstoppable and 
terrifying warriors. Ain Jalut proved that even the mighty Mongols 

could be beaten.Amitai-Preiss, Mongols and Mamluks. May, 
The Mongol Art of War
.Morgan, 
The Mongols. Turnbull, 
Genghis Khan and the Mongol Conquests.1. 
Had the Mongol armies not repeatedly been recalled after the death of a khan, do you believe that they would ultimately have conquered 
Europe?2. 
The Mongols based their armies on mounted warriors, in contrast to 
many of the armies of the ancient/medieval world, which focused on 
infantry. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each style?
Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider88Lecture 13: 1410 Tannenberg—Cataclysm of Knights
1410 Tannenberg—Cataclysm of Knights
Lecture 13On the morning of July 15, 1410, two armies drew up on opposite 
battles ever fought in medieval Europe, involving over 50,000 combatants, many of them knights in full armor. On one side were the 

fearsome Teutonic Knights, supported by knights from Kulm, Konigsberg, 

and Brandenburg. The other side consisted of the combined armies of Poland 

and Lithuania. The subsequent Battle of Tannenberg would be a grim, 

violent affair that ended with the near destruction of one side and helped to 

determine the borders of Eastern Europe for many centuries to come. The Teutonic Knights
During the Crusades, a number of new monastic orders formed whose members took the usual religious vows but trained as 
knights. The most famous of these orders were the Templars and 

the Hospitallers, both of which were based in the Holy Land and 
played important roles in the history of the Crusades. 
time and originally based in Acre in the Holy Land, truly began to 


Teutonic Knights; as the name implies, they were mainly Germanic, 

and they eventually focused their attention almost entirely on 
Northern and Eastern Europe. Their chosen opponents were the last remaining European pagans, found in Prussia, Lithuania, and other parts of northeastern Europe. 
The Knights set up a network of massive castles from which they 
launched their raids, and they aggressively pursued their chosen 
enemies, steadily expanding their territory and driving east. This 


for the Battle of Tannenberg.
89At the time of Tannenberg, 
the grandmaster of the 
order was Ulrich von 
Jungingen, from a noble 
southern German family. 

Over the years, he served 
in nearly every major 
position in the Teutonic 

Knights’ hierarchy, 

including marshal of the 
order and commander 
of a castle. Although he 

was an effective military 

leader, contemporary 

sources describe him as 
headstrong, arrogant, and a 
bit impulsive. 
ordained warriors equipped 
with complete suits of plate 
armor and mounted on great chargers probably amounted to only a 

few hundred. They were supplemented by a much larger number of 

Teutonic lay brothers, who trained as knights but were not ordained 

and fought as somewhat less heavily armed horsemen. Each castle also had larger numbers of hired men-at-arms, 



crossbowmen. Finally, the Teutonic Knights made extensive use of noblemen 
from many countries, who volunteered to serve temporarily as a 
demonstration of piety but were not part of the formal membership. 
Each of these guest Crusaders would have been accompanied by his 
The Teutonic Knights were 
professional soldiers encased from 
head to foot in the highest quality 
plate armor and mounted atop huge 
war horses specially bred to carry 
their enormous weight. © Livrustkammaren/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain.
90Lecture 13: 1410 Tannenberg—Cataclysm of Knights
The Poles and the LithuaniansIn the late 14th century, the youngest daughter of the reigning king 
of Hungary was a girl named Jadwiga, who received an excellent 
education and spoke Hungarian, German, Polish, Latin, Bosnian, 
and Serbian. When she was 10 years old, through a complex series 

of events, she became heir to the throne of Poland and was crowned 
as king. Meanwhile, a succession crisis was going on in Lithuania, and great pressure was being exerted to convert this last pagan nation 
in Europe to Christianity. A young duke named Jagiello emerged 

as the dominant candidate. Jagiello had been raised a pagan, but 
he converted to Orthodox Christianity. Because he now wanted to 

marry Jadwiga, he agreed to become Roman Catholic.In 1386, the two married, and the countries of Poland and Lithuania 

country. Although many hailed the conversion of Jagiello as 


outpost of paganism, others, including the Teutonic Knights, 

dismissed it as insincere and, thus, to be ignored.Jagiello faced threats to his control of Lithuania, foremost from his cousin Vytautas, who had persuaded the Teutonic Knights to 

undertake several military actions against Lithuania, given that they 
refused to recognize Jagiello as a genuine Christian monarch. After several years, Jagiello and Vytautas agreed to shelve their 
differences and their rivalry and, instead, work together for the 



proved to be long-lasting and highly effective. 
In practical terms, Jagiello was the nominal ruler of Lithuania, but Vytautas oversaw day-to-day affairs. In 1399, Queen Jadwiga died, 

leaving Jagiello the king of Poland in both name and reality.
91The CampaignThe situation was volatile, and the spark that ignited it into open warfare was a rebellion against the Teutonic Knights by the 

inhabitants of a region called Samogitia in western Lithuania. With 

Ulrich taking a hard line in negotiations, Jagiello and Vytautas 

determined to launch an invasion of the Knights’ territory. 
Lithuania hoped to recover Samogitia and Poland to acquire a lost province of its own, Pomerania. To achieve these aims, Jagiello and 

Vytautas decided to launch a strike northwards towards the Knights’ 

main stronghold at Marienbad. As the allied army marched north, the Knights’ army shadowed 
their movements, and eventually, the two forces drew together 

between the villages of Tannenberg and Grunwald. Most modern 

analysts believe that the army of the Teutonic Knights had 25,000 

to 30,000 men, and the allied army of the Poles and Lithuanians, 
about 40,000 to 55,000.The BattleOn July 15, 1410, the two armies faced off across a shallow valley. 
The elite of the Teutonic Knights were deployed on the left side of 

the line, while the guest Crusaders constituted the right wing. On 
the other side, the Lithuanians formed the allied army’s right wing, 

facing the Knights, while the Poles were deployed on the left. The combined Polish–Lithuanian army swept forward along the 
of intense hand-to-hand combat continued for nearly an hour, with 

neither side giving way. 
Then, abruptly, the Lithuanians and some of the allied forces on 
the right wing pulled back and apparently went into full retreat. 
This incident is controversial, with commentators both ancient and 
modern disagreeing widely as to its cause. 
o Some claim that it was a planned retreat designed to lure the Knights out of their formation and scatter them, in which 
92Lecture 13: 1410 Tannenberg—Cataclysm of Knights
vulnerable condition they could then be counterattacked. This was a classic move used by steppe horsemen, and the 
Lithuanians were well acquainted with it from their experience 
o Others maintain that it was a genuine retreat and that the 
Lithuanians were forced to fall back under pressure from the 
heavily armored Knights. Whether real or feigned, the allied 

army’s right wing withdrew, and the guest Crusaders surged 

forward.
and on the left, battling the Teutonic Knights. Some of the Poles 

now even drove into the gap created by the advance of the guest 
At this crucial stage of the battle, Ulrich mounted his horse, gathered 
the reserve force of the Knights around him, and led a thundering 

at the Polish royal eagle banner, under which he assumed he would 

Had they broken through the Polish ranks and killed Jagiello, this charge might well have won the battle, but Vytautas saw it coming 

and, collecting a force of his best-equipped knights, moved to 

and faltered just short of Jagiello. The battle now turned decisively against the Germans. The 
remaining Knights were assaulted from the rear by Polish light 
cavalry, while on the right, the Lithuanians swept back onto the 


victorious Poles. By the end of the day, between 10,000 and 15,000 on the German 
side were dead, with about the same number captured. It was a 
crushing defeat; the full-ranking Teutonic Knights were almost 
93
with the entire leadership of the order. 
OutcomesAlthough the Knights would survive for quite a while after Tannenberg, their power was much reduced and they went into a 

long decline. The Battle of Tannenberg helped to establish the 

borders of the states in Eastern Europe and effectively put an end to 

medieval German expansion into Poland and Lithuania. The battle is perhaps even more important in symbolic terms. o For the Lithuanians and Poles, it represents a high point of national pride and achievement, especially with regard to 
resisting invaders. o In World War I, when the Germans won a major victory 
over the Russians near the site, they named the later battle 
Tannenberg as well and represented it as having avenged the 

earlier loss. o Some later Germans romanticized the Teutonic Knights as 
a group nobly trying to bring Christianity and civilization 
to backward parts of Europe. Nazi Germany, for example, 

portrayed its own seizing of eastern territory as a continuation 
of the Knights’ mission. 
The Battle of Tannenberg was the last major battle of the Middle 
Ages and was one of the last in which gunpowder did not play an 
important role. In terms of world history, it was the cusp of the 

vastly important Age of Exploration, when European seafarers 

begin to establish links with the rest of the globe. 94Lecture 13: 1410 Tannenberg—Cataclysm of Knights
Turnbull, 
Tannenberg 1410
.Urban, The Teutonic Knights
.———, Tannenberg and After
.1. 

the battle’s outcome, and which one do you think made the greatest 

contribution?2. 




enormous investment in resources required to equip and maintain them?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider95Frigidus, Badr, Diu—Obscure Turning Points
Lecture 14This lecture considers three unrelated battles involving very different 
participants and spanning more than 1,100 years. What links these 

battles is that each had important effects—in some cases, changing 
the course of global history—but information about the battles themselves is 
especially scanty or uncertain. This, then, is a lecture about decisive battles 



little is known about the course of the battle itself.The Battle of the Frigidus River (394)
In 312, Constantine defeated his rival Maxentius at the Battle of the Milvian Bridge to become emperor of the Roman world. Following 

emperor to convert to Christianity. 
Throughout the 4th century, many Romans, especially senators, 
continued to worship pagan gods and to urge the return to 

polytheism, causing dissension between the eastern and western 
halves of the empire. The emperor of the eastern half was 

Theodosius, a fervent proponent of Christianity. The western 

empire was ruled by Valentinian II. 
When Valentinian was found dead under mysterious circumstances, 
the western empire passed into the control of a Frankish general 
named Arbogast, who appointed a new emperor, Eugenius. 
Eugenius was a well-known sympathizer with the Roman aristocrats who favored paganism, appointing a number of them to 
key government posts. Pagan shrines were restored, and it seemed 
that a pagan revival was underway.
Theodosius was determined to quash this development; when diplomatic efforts failed, he organized his army for an invasion of 
96Lecture 14: Frigidus, Badr, Diu—Obscure Turning Points
the west, departing Constantinople in May 394 and crossing the Alps unopposed. The battle began with a headlong attack by Theodosius’s men. 

On the second day, a tempest supposedly swept through the valley, 
with the high winds blowing directly into the faces of Eugenius’s 

army. Our only sources for this battle are Christian ones, which 

emphasize the role of this storm, claiming that it was so powerful 
that it blew the arrows of Eugenius’s men back at them. The army 

of Theodosius was victorious.
The battle was perceived by contemporaries as a clear victory of the Christian God over the pagan ones, and it resulted in the deaths of 
many of paganism’s most prominent adherents. Thus, Christianity 

the inhabitants of the Roman Empire converted. The Battle of Badr (624) 
In 624, Islam had only a few hundred converts, who had been 

nearby town of Medina, an event known as the Hejira. These converts were led by the Prophet Mohammed, struggling to spread his nascent religion and establish his authority. The 

expulsion from Mecca undermined this ambition and left him and 
his followers refugees. It seemed as if Islam might fade away before 

it started.Mecca was a major trading center and a key point on the caravan route. For this reason, Mohammed decided to raid the caravans, 
simultaneously providing a source of income and offering the 

satisfaction of getting back at the Meccans who had spurned them. After several years of minor raids, the tension between the early Muslims and Mecca came to a head when the Meccans organized 
97an especially large trade caravan. This tempting target motivated 
Mohammad to make an attempt on the caravan. Anticipating this 

move, the merchants of Mecca likewise mobilized. The caravan managed to dodge Mohammad’s force and reach 
Mecca safely, but the Meccans were determined to eradicate this 

menace to their trade. Mohammad likewise needed a successful 
battle in order to shore up his reputation. The two small armies eventually met at Badr, a spot in the desert 


stopped up most of the wells, leaving only a few on some high 
ground; he then encamped his troops—about 300 men, 70 camels, 
and 2 horses—in a defensive position around them. The Meccans 

numbered more than 900, including several hundred cavalry on 
horses and camels. The battle began in a traditional manner, with champions from 


on their knoll. The Muslims did not run to meet them, but instead 

responded with a rain of arrows on the Meccans as they labored up 

the slope. 
surged forward, broke the Meccan line, and won the battle. About 

70 Meccans were slain, with about the same number captured. On 
the Muslim side, losses numbered only 14. Badr is one of the few battles mentioned in the Koran, where the victory is ascribed to divine intervention. Whether one attributes 

the Muslims’ success to this or to Mohammad’s savvy generalship, 

Badr was a key turning point in the history of Islam.
o o It added a military dimension to Islam, with Mohammad now acknowledged and respected as a victorious general and the 98Lecture 14: Frigidus, Badr, Diu—Obscure Turning Points
Muslims as an armed force to be reckoned with—one of the o It established Islam as a legitimate religion and infused its The Battle of Diu (1509) One of the pivotal moments in world history was the 16th century, 
the era of exploration and colonization, when previously separate 

cultures and civilizations became aware of one another and were 

connected by new sea routes. For some civilizations, such as the 

indigenous peoples of the 

Americas, this contact 

would be disastrous, 

while for others, 

such as Spain and the 

Netherlands, it became 

the stepping stone to 


 colonial empires. 
Most of the earliest 
European voyages of 

exploration were motivated 



seaborne path to India, 

Southeast Asia, and China, 

fabled lands of limitless 

riches—the source of rare 

spices, silk, and other 

prized luxury items. 
The reason for this 
search for a sea route 

was that all the land routes were controlled by Muslim powers 



 their territories. 
The new deep-bellied ships of the 15th century were designed to provide the 
stability and cargo space required to 
traverse the oceans; such ships were 
soon also armed with rows of cannons 
along the sides.© jgaunion/iStock/Thinkstock.99Islam had grown rapidly, and its dominion stretched from the 
Balkans deep into Africa and east to northern India. Fueling this 

expansion was the Islamic states’ stranglehold on the lucrative 

Eastern trade routes. 
in to the south and east by Islamic states. In technological terms, 
too, Europe had seemed to be stagnating during the Middle Ages, 

while such Muslim cities as Baghdad became centers of innovation 
and learning.Seafaring in the East at this time was similar to that practiced in the classical world, with the long, narrow galley propelled by 
hundreds of oars. Such vessels had an extremely limited range, 
rarely ventured out of sight of land, and could operate only in calm 
or enclosed waters. But here was one area of technology in which Western Europe 
had advanced: seafaring on the open seas. At the close of the 15
th century, Europe had begun to produce deep-bellied, square-rigged 

ships capable of braving and even crossing the great oceans. This 

type of ship could also be armed by cutting holes along the sides 
and adding rows of cannons. Although many countries concentrated their efforts on sailing 
west, the seafarers of Portugal focused on an eastern route. They 

journeyed south around the tip of Africa, then explored the coastline 

back north toward the Arabian peninsula. 
By 1500, Portuguese mariners eventually found themselves in 
India. The Arabic merchants who controlled the trade were not 

pleased to encounter the Portuguese in their territory; seeing 

opportunity, however, the Portuguese seized several ports and 

raided Arabic shipping. 

command of Dom Francisco de Almeida, with orders that show a 
100Lecture 14: Frigidus, Badr, Diu—Obscure Turning Points
remarkably practical understanding of geopolitics and economics: “Nothing would serve us better than to have a fortress at the mouth 
of the Red Sea … because from there we could cut off the spices 

… and all those in India from now on could only trade through us.” Correctly perceiving Almeida’s expedition as a threat to their 
monopoly, an unlikely coalition of Mamluks of Egypt, Ottoman 

Turks, and ships from the local Indian rulers banded their naval 

forces together to oppose him. The Venetian Republic also felt 

threatened by the Portuguese and offered assistance. 

in 1509 and sailed boldly in to attack them. Almeida had 1,200 men 

on 19 oceangoing ships, 12 of which were of a carrack design and 
7 of a caravel type. 
80 to100 war galleys and the rest dhows and other small coastal craft. 

broadsides from their rows of cannons while the swarms of galleys 
and other boats attempted to ram or run alongside and board. The 



entirely wiped out. Over the next several decades, there would be at least three more 

along the northwestern coast of India, but all would end the  same way.

crippling Islamic monopoly on trade with the East and began its 
steady rise to world domination. The economic shift resulting 

from the battle also set into motion the slow decline and eventual 
disintegration of the once-mighty Ottoman Empire. 101What the Battle of Diu had fundamentally determined was that 
the ultimate victor in the rivalry to control the rich trade with the 
East would be a Christian European power, not a Muslim one, an 

outcome that can truly be said to have profoundly shaped the rest 
of world history.
Cameron, The Last Pagans of Rome. 
Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–1580
.  Krefft, 
Ten Battles
.Mathew, 
History of the Portuguese Navigation in India. Weir, 
50 Battles That Changed the World
.1. 
Which of the three battles discussed in this lecture had the greatest 
2. 
Does the success of Christianity owe more to the outcome of the 

Frigidus, or does the success of Islam owe more to the outcome of Badr, 

and would either religion have survived a loss at its respective battle?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider102Lecture 15: 1521 Tenochtitlán—Aztecs vs. Conquistadors
1521 Tenochtitlán—Aztecs vs. Conquistadors
Lecture 15The conquests of Mesoamerica and South America are among the most 
astonishing military stories of all time. For example, in one battle 
fought at the Inca capital of Cuzco, 190 Spaniards defeated an army of 40,000 Inca warriors with a loss of only one man. Similarly, in two years, 

Cortés, with fewer than 1,000 Spaniards, utterly destroyed the Aztec Empire. 

The subjugation of the Americas by Europe is one of the more controversial 

episodes in history. The conquistadors have alternately been lauded as brave 

men succeeding against all odds and condemned as rapacious invaders 

responsible for an appalling genocide. On the surface, these episodes seem 
to be dramatic demonstrations of European military superiority. How could 

these unlikely victories have transpired? The AztecsIn 1500, the Aztecs were at the height of their power, yet only a 
few hundred years earlier, they had been a wandering tribe with no 

homeland, looked down on by nearly all other groups. In 1325, they 
settled on a swampy island in the middle of Lake Texcoco because 

of a divine prophecy that instructed them to make their home 
where they saw an eagle perched on a cactus eating a snake. The 

Nahuatl name for the nopal cactus was tenocha, and the city was  
dubbed Tenochtitlán. 
The Aztec society was both militant and theocratic, with priests 
and religion playing central roles. The Aztec pantheon of gods was 

a frightening collection, most of whom demanded regular human 

using their own blood, and only regular offerings of human blood 

would enable it to continue. To meet the gods’ insatiable demand for blood, Aztec warfare 
eventually became focused not so much on killing enemies in battle 103as on trying to immobilize and capture them so that they might 
Not surprisingly, the Aztecs were 
not loved by their subjects, and 
they maintained their hold on 

power through fear and military 
might. The Aztec army was large 

and well organized. The elite 

soldiers were members of warrior 
fraternities who had repeatedly 
proven themselves in battle. Their main hand-to-hand weapon was a wooden club, lined on both 
sides with razor-sharp pieces 

of obsidian. The knights also 

carried small wooden shields, and 
their armor consisted of wooden 
helmets and quilted cotton body 
armor. Their helmets and armor 

were often coated in bright 
feathers or animal skins. These elite warriors were supplemented by ranks of less proven soldiers, similarly armed but without the elaborate adornment, and 
by large levies of less trained troops: archers with bows and arrows, 

slingers who threw stones with great accuracy, and men equipped 

with the atlatl, or dart thrower. 
The Spaniards Between 1506 and 1518, some 200 Spanish ships traversed the Atlantic. They initially settled on the islands of the Caribbean and 

were headquartered in Cuba but, 20 years after Columbus, had still 
not ventured in force onto the mainland. Among the most feared of the Aztec warriors were the Jaguar 
Knights and the Eagle Knights, 
both of whom went into battle 
dressed in elaborate costumes 
resembling their animal 
namesakes.© Maunus/Wikimedia Commons/CC BY-SA 2.5.
104Lecture 15: 1521 Tenochtitlán—Aztecs vs. Conquistadors
In 1518, the governor of New Spain selected a minor nobleman named Hernán Cortés to lead an expedition to conquer Mexico. 
Cortés landed in Mexico in early 1519 with approximately 500 
men. His soldiers were an unruly lot motivated by varying degrees 
of greed and piety. The majority were Castilian Spaniards, and most 

were already well-trained and experienced. All were equipped with high-quality Spanish steel swords and steel 
helmets that gave good protection to their heads. Many also had 

high-quality steel body armor, consisting of either solid breastplates 

or chain mail. Cortés also had some crossbowmen, whose weapons 

could accurately propel a deadly dart more than 200 meters, and a 

number of Spanish-Arabian war horses; the men who rode them were 

highly experienced and would play a key role in the battles to come. 
The army of Cortés also included some soldiers equipped with technologically advanced weapons: the arquebusiers, who carried 
an early type of gun; though heavy, awkward, and slow, this weapon 


These were crude and small but still had a sizable shock value 
against those who had not previously encountered such weapons. Finally, Cortés had a pack of large, vicious, trained war dogs. They 
do not feature much in Spanish accounts of the expedition, but 

vividly drawn in the codices of the Aztecs, suggesting that they may 

The Invasion of MexicoCortés landed at Veracruz and began marching inland to 
Tenochtitlán. Because he had to leave some men to secure the ships 

and the coast, the force he led to conquer the Aztecs consisted of 

merely 300 soldiers. Of these, 40 had crossbows, 20 had arquebuses, 
and 15 were mounted on horses. In addition, he had three cannons 
and his pack of war dogs. 105Cortés fought and won several battles against the Tlaxcalan, the 
one major group in central Mexico who had not yet been conquered 
by the Aztecs. Eventually, they made peace and a formal military 

alliance, gaining Cortés tens of thousands of native troops. These initial battles showed that the steel armor of the conquistadors was virtually impenetrable by any of the native weapons. On the 
other hand, the Spanish swords easily sliced through the cotton and 
wood armor of the natives. Their crossbows and arquebuses were 

devastating, both from a distance and in crowds. 

rider to be some kind of monster. Cavalry charges were devastating 

to formations of native troops, who had no counter to the assaults. 
Even the war dogs wreaked havoc. The Aztec emperor at the time, Moctezuma, seemed uncertain how 
to react and may even have believed that the appearance of the 

of the harvest season, when the Aztecs normally did not wage war; 

thus, Moctezuma invited Cortés to visit him at Tenochtitlán. 
On November 8, 1519, Cortés and his 300 companions entered Tenochtitlán; they were housed in a palace and treated as honored 

guests. After several days of sightseeing, Cortés kidnapped 

Moctezuma, taking him to the Spaniards’ enclosure. The Aztecs 

did not know what to do; a tense stand-off ensued, during which 

Moctezuma was the “guest” of the Spanish. Now Cortés learned that 900 Spaniards had landed on the coast and that their commander, Narvarez, had orders to arrest Cortés and take 

over the expedition. Leaving only 80 men in Tenochtitlán under the 

command of Pedro de Alvarado, Cortés rushed back to the coast 

and rounded up some of the men he had left behind, amassing a 
force of 350. 106Lecture 15: 1521 Tenochtitlán—Aztecs vs. Conquistadors
He entered into negotiations with Narvarez while secretly 
communicating with friends within Narvarez’s forces and 

spreading bribes among Narvarez’s troops. Cortés then launched 

a surprise night attack on Narvarez’s headquarters. Narvarez and 

his lieutenants were captured, and through a mixture of bribery and 
skilled oratory, Cortés persuaded the rest of the soldiers to join him. 
Meanwhile in Tenochtitlán, Alvarado had been invited to attend 
a religious festival at which many high-ranking Aztecs were 

present. Perhaps seeing this as an opportunity to paralyze more 

of the Aztec leadership, Alvarado had broken the sacred peace 

and attacked the unarmed worshippers, slaughtering many of the 

Aztec aristocracy. Alvarado was now besieged in the palace by 

mobs of furious Aztec warriors.
Cortés, to impress upon his troops the message that they had to succeed or die trying, ordered that the ships be destroyed. There 

would now literally be no turning back. Cortés managed to break 
through to Alvarado and join his forces, but the Spaniards were 

surrounded and besieged in the palace. The captive Moctezuma, who all along seems to have favored a conciliatory policy, agreed to urge the Aztecs to be calm. When 

he appeared, they stoned him, fatally wounding him. The new 

emperor, Cuauhtémoc, viewed the Spaniards solely as enemies to 

be exterminated and launched an all-out attack. 
one of the causeways. Many of the conquistadors, in addition to 
their weapons, could not resist burdening themselves with the gold 
treasure, and as they tried to swim across the gaps in the causeways, 
hundreds drowned. Cortés escaped but lost half his army. As they marched away, the 
bedraggled survivors had to suffer the additional horror of watching 

their captured friends and comrades being dragged to the top of 
the main temple to have their hearts ripped out by priests and their 
107
Noche Triste, “the Sad Night.” 
Cortés retreated to the territory of his Tlaxcalan allies and began 

that a new factor made its presence known: A smallpox epidemic 

broke out and swept through both the Aztecs and their allies. 
In 1521, Cortés returned to Lake Texcoco and began systematically 


of 13 small ships, each equipped with a light cannon. These were 

used to seize control of the lake and cut off the causeways, thus 

preventing food and reinforcements from reaching the city. 
The Aztecs were driven back into Tenochtitlán, and Cortés and his 
allies laid siege. Under the leadership of Cuauhtémoc, the Aztecs 

refused to surrender, and Cortés had to invade. After months of 


in Spanish hands and the Aztecs had been virtually exterminated.
The conquest of Mexico was a pivotal event: It opened up the Americas to European exploitation, with vast economic, cultural, 
and religious consequences, and it set the model for the era of 
European colonization that transformed the world. Díaz, The Conquest of New Spain.Hassig, Aztec Warfare
.Thomas, Conquest.Robinson, The Spanish Invasion of Mexico. Suggested Reading108Lecture 15: 1521 Tenochtitlán—Aztecs vs. Conquistadors
1. 
Which of the following factors played the greatest role in the success of Cortés and why: disease, guns, steel, horses, attack dogs, native allies, 
Cortés’s decisions, or Moctezuma’s decisions?
2. 
Was the fall of the Aztec Empire inevitable? How might the Aztecs have 

successfully resisted the conquistadors?Questions to Consider1091532 Cajamarca—Inca vs. ConquistadorsLecture 16In early 1527, two small Spanish ships crept tentatively down the unexplored western coast of South America. Just after crossing the 

equator, they encountered a large, well-made, oceangoing balsa raft. 
The crew of the raft was about 20 Inca merchants. This moment marked 



Empire. The Spaniards were impressed by the sophistication of the vessel’s 

construction and even more excited by the silver and gold adornments worn 
by the crew. Such treasures were exactly what the Spaniards were seeking, 

and they immediately seized the raft and its contents. Within a few years, the 

mighty Inca Empire would fall to European invaders.The IncaThe Inca occupied a narrow strip of territory, several hundred miles 
wide but almost 3,000 miles long, stretching down the western 
coast of South America and encompassing parts of what are today 

Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, and Argentina. 
These regions had been home to a succession of indigenous civilizations and cultures that had been building urban sites at least 
as far as back as 1400 B.C. These civilizations developed a high 

level of craftsmanship in textiles, metalwork, and pottery. 

o They domesticated llamas and alpacas as sources of food, wool, and transportation. o They erected monumental structures using precisely cut  stone blocks. o They developed religious beliefs and practices, such as 
 sacred calendar. 
110
Lecture 16: 1532 Cajamarca—Inca vs. Conquistadorso Some established large empires created by conquest and held 
together by an administrative structure and road-building. The Inca were relative latecomers to this environment, but all these elements would be incorporated into their culture. After founding 

the city of Cuzco, the Inca gradually increased in power until they 
controlled the entire valley and surrounding regions. Cuzco remained the capital city, but the empire was divided into 
four administrative districts of varying size. Cuzco was considered 
the center of the world, and four great highways leading to each of 

the regions converged at its central plaza. 
Rest stops and storehouses were erected at intervals along the roads so that the army could march swiftly, and a network of relay runners 

was established to carry messages. Altogether, about 25,000 miles 

of roads linked an empire with an estimated population of around 
10 million. All Inca males were required to undergo basic military training, 
making it easy to raise armies of tens of thousands in times of 

crisis, and the system of storehouses greatly facilitated supplying 

of 10 and various multiples up to the largest unit size of 10,000, all 

foot soldiers. Popular missile weapons were slings and bolas—stones joined by a 

hand-to-hand weapon was a club or mace consisting of a wooden 
shaft with a stone or metal head molded with pointy knobs. Armor 

consisted of quilted or padded garments, light shields, and helmets. 

likely this was smallpox. Among the victims was the emperor, as 

well as his chosen heir. Between the terror caused by the epidemic 
111and the succession crisis caused by the deaths of the old emperor and his heir, the Inca Empire was thrown into confusion. 
In the civil war between the two remaining sons, Huascar and Atahualpa, Atahualpa prevailed. Apparently an able leader, 

Atahualpa had been able to call on the allegiance of the army  and marched in triumph to 
the capital. It was precisely at this dramatic moment that 
Francisco Pizarro and his 
army of 167 Spaniards 
appeared, marching inland 
from the coast near where 
Atahualpa was encamped.The SpaniardsPizarro was the illegitimate son of a Spanish military 

Inspired by the tales of Cortés’s success, he went 

to the New World and made 

several attempts to mount an 
expedition into unexplored 
southern areas. He entered 
into a partnership with 


encountered the raft of the Inca merchants in 1527. With the goods seized in this encounter as evidence, Pizarro returned 
to Spain, seeking royal backing for a major expedition. He got 

authorizing him to conquer Peru and naming him governor. 
Pizarro sailed from Panama on December 27, 1530. He proceeded slowly along the coast, eventually reaching Inca territory but Francisco Pizarro managed to bring down the mighty Inca Empire with 
even fewer men than Cortés had 
commanded.© Manuel González Olaechea/Wikimedia Commons/ CC BY-SA 3.0.
112
Lecture 16: 1532 Cajamarca—Inca vs. Conquistadorsencountering only ruins as a result of the devastation caused by the civil war between Atahualpa and Huascar. 
Finally, on November 8, 1532, Pizarro left the coast to head inland. 
He took with him 62 horsemen, 106 foot soldiers, and a few small 
cannons. This small army ascended up into the mountains, passing 

several points where their progress might easily have been halted 
by a defensive force. The CampaignBy extraordinary good fortune, Pizarro was making his advance just as the civil war was reaching its climax, and Atahualpa was 

encamped with an army of between 40,000 and 80,000 men at 
Cajamarca, near where Pizarro was marching into the highlands. Atahualpa sent an envoy to the Spanish bearing gifts and invited Pizarro to meet him at Cajamarca. He seems to have received 
accurate reports about their horses and weapons, but clearly, he 

viewed their numbers as too few to pose any threat. 

vast encampment of Atahualpa’s army. The Spanish occupied low 

stone buildings lining the triangular main plaza. A Spanish embassy 

visited Atahualpa, with inconclusive results. 
Pizarro and his men began to fear for their lives, realizing that they were deep in Inca territory and isolated from any possible aid. They 

decided that their best chance of survival was to attempt to emulate 
Cortés’s move and kidnap Atahualpa, using him as a hostage to 

ensure their safety. 
Accordingly, they invited Atahualpa to visit and prepared to seize 
him if the opportunity arose. The Inca leader promised to come. 

As the hours passed, the Spanish grew more agitated and sent a 
message promising that no harm or insult would befall him. As the 

sun began to set, Atahualpa, carried on a litter and accompanied by 

an estimated 7,000 of his chiefs and retainers, entered the village. 113
Pizarro had his men, ready and fully armed, concealed in the buildings. He had also occupied a small fort and stationed his 
cannons and more men there. The Inca appear to have honored 

an agreement to come unarmed, although some may have carried 
slings and small knives. Eyewitnesses from the Spanish and Inca sides give somewhat differing accounts of what happened next, but what is certain is that 

Pizarro gave the signal to attack. His men, including 60 mounted on 

horses, burst out of the buildings and charged into the ranks of the 


crowded throng of natives, and the steel-encased Spanish began to 
cut them down. Pizarro himself led the attack on Atahualpa’s litter.
Oddly, the Spanish allowed Atahualpa to send and receive 
messengers and to act as the emperor while he remained captive. 

would soon escape. Noting the fascination that gold seemed to hold 

gold objects up to a height of about seven feet in exchange for his 
freedom. The Spanish eagerly accepted the terms, and Atahualpa 

gave orders for the gold to be collected and sent to Cajamarca. He badly misjudged the Spanish, however. Months passed while 
the ransom was collected, during which time the Spanish acquired 
reinforcements and took into custody the most powerful Inca 
generals, who might have organized opposition to them. 
Once the incredible ransom was assembled, the Spanish melted it all down, destroying an irreplaceable artistic heritage. Pizarro did 
not release Atahualpa as promised and, in July 1533, put him on 

trial on trumped-up charges and executed him.
The Spanish replaced him with a succession of puppet emperors, while the rebel Inca elevated their own emperor. The last Inca 

emperor died in 1572, by which time Spanish consolidation of 

power over the Inca Empire was complete.114
Lecture 16: 1532 Cajamarca—Inca vs. ConquistadorsOutcomesThe conquest and subsequent colonization of the Americas by 
European powers in the 16th century was certainly a turning point 
in history, with wide-reaching effects that are still felt around the 

world today. But the question remains: Why were the Spanish 

successful in the face of overwhelming odds?One obvious factor is naval technology. Developing the sort of 
oceangoing ships that could carry enough supplies, sail against 
contrary winds, and endure storms, along with the navigational 
instruments to steer an accurate course, was crucial. Another is the superior quality of Spanish steel, both in armor for 
serious advantage, but there are many instances in history of groups 
armed with less advanced weaponry being able to defeat high-tech 
armies, even those that possessed gunpowder. 
Attention also often focuses on the Spanish horses, which were intimidating, and Spanish cavalry charges were initially devastating, 

but the Inca quickly learned to dig pits and take measures that 
helped limit the effectiveness of horsemen. 
Like most complex historical questions, the answer is still being debated, and the true explanation is probably some combination of 
factors. Nevertheless, the astonishing conquests of the Americas 

and collapse of the major indigenous empires constitute two 

D’Altroy, 
The Incas. Hemming, The Conquest of the Incas.McEwan, The Incas: New Perspectives. Yupanqui, 
An Inca Account of the Conquest of Peru
. Suggested Reading115
1. 
Which of the following factors played the greatest role in Pizarro’s 
success and why: disease, guns, steel, horses, Pizarro’s decisions, 

Atahualpa’s decisions, or luck?
2. 
What fundamental similarities and differences are there between the 

campaigns and conquests of Cortés and Pizarro? Questions to Consider116
Lecture 17: 1526 & 1556 Panipat—Babur & Akbar in India
1526 & 1556 Panipat—Babur & Akbar in India
Lecture 17Certain places seem fated to be battlegrounds—locations where major battles were fought, often hundreds of years apart. Usually, 

the reason is that the site constitutes a strategic crossroads, where invaders naturally would encounter defenders. Geographic determinism 
seems to be why the undistinguished little town of Panipat, about 80 miles 

1526, 1556, and 1761—each arguably decisive. The First and Second 

Battles of Panipat took place between local rulers and two of the earliest and 
most famous of the Mughal emperors, Babur and Akbar, and these battles 

established Mughal domination over the Indian subcontinent that would last 
until the arrival of the British.Babur 
On June 8, 1494, in the fortress city of Akhsi, in the modern 
province of Ferghana, Uzbekistan, a local chieftain named Mirza 

was killed, leaving an 11-year-old son named Babur. Through his 

father, Babur could claim to be an heir of Tamerlane, and on his 

mother’s side, he could trace his ancestry to the greatest of all 

Mongols, the mighty Genghis Khan himself. Despite his youth, 
Babur was already dreaming of becoming a great conqueror.
Babur had a literary bent and, from an early age, wrote a diary that would survive and grow into a charmingly frank autobiography of 
his deeds, known as the Baburnama. In it, he describes how, after 
his father’s death, he attempted to take control of Ferghana and 

His youth and the treachery of others combined against him, however, and within three years, Babur had lost not only Samarkand 

but Ferghana and had been deserted by nearly all of his retainers. 

Undaunted, he rebounded from this low point, seizing the city of 
Kabul and making it the base for his operations. 117
As his empire grew, Babur began to look to the riches of India and 
to lead raids into northern India. Since the battles of Tarain several 

centuries earlier, northern India had been dominated by the Muslim 

rulers of the Delhi sultanate. Babur determined to attack the sultanate, whose current sultan was Ibrahim Lodi, an Afghan Pashtun. The coming battle would 

be a study in contrasts, with one side emphasizing training and 
new technologies and the other relying on massive numbers and 
traditional methods.The First Battle of Panipat (1526)Babur spent several years preparing for his invasion, assembling a 
highly professional army of about 10,000 soldiers. The core of his 

army was made up of excellent Turkic horsemen, well trained in 

the sort of hit-and-run wheeling attacks favored by steppe cavalry 

for centuries. 
Babur had acquired a cutting-edge military technology: gunpowder. 
The Ottomans had begun employing cannons and primitive guns to 
good effect, and by 1519, Babur had brought an artillery expert to 

Kabul to advise him in the use of this new technology. In addition to 

acquiring some cannons, Babur equipped a unit with matchlocks—

In February 1526, a scouting group from Babur’s army defeated an 
advance element of Sultan Lodi’s army. Babur now advanced with 

his main army to Panipat. Sultan Lodi had amassed a huge army to 
face the invaders. Sources claim a force of 100,000 men and 1,000 

armored elephants. Babur ordered his 700 baggage carts tied together in a line, leaving wide enough gaps between them for cavalry to charge through. The 

matchlock men and light cannons were established on the carts and 
behind other temporary barriers, transforming the whole line into a 
series of miniature strong points. The remainder of the infantry was 
118
Lecture 17: 1526 & 1556 Panipat—Babur & Akbar in India
distributed around the carts, giving further protection to the slow-Babur’s horse archers were in left, right, and center formations, and 

his line against the structures of the town of Panipat, and the other 
against the banks of a river. The left and right cavalry wings were 


from the powerful Mongol bows, and herd them toward the middle, 
impeding their mobility by crowding them and providing a dense 
target for the gunpowder weapons.
On April 21, 1526, the sultan commanded his men to advance. His 
strategy was unimaginative, consisting of a frontal charge and the 

hope that his greater numbers would overwhelm the enemy. The 

charge seems to have been badly coordinated, and it bogged down 

among the carts and obstacles. Meanwhile, Babur’s cavalry were deploying on both sides as 
planned, hemming in and harassing the attacking ranks. An attempt 

to break Babur’s line near the town was repulsed, and surrounded 




5,000 men in his reserve and, somewhere in the melee, was killed.Babur had defeated a much larger force by virtue of superior 
generalship, training, and technology. He offered a harsh but 

probably accurate assessment of his opponent: “Ibrahim Lodi was 
an inexperienced man, negligent in his movements. He marched 
without orders or halted without plan and engaged in battle  without foresight.” Effects of the First BattleBabur was succeeded by his son, Humayan, who died in 1556. Humayan’s son and heir, Akbar, was 13, and the Mughal dynasty 

seemed on the verge of coming to a premature end. Several strong 
119
local rulers who resented Mughal control took advantage of Humayan’s death and Akbar’s youth to rebel. 
The nominal leader of this rebellion was Sultan Adil Shah Suri, but 
the driving force behind its success was the sultan’s prime minister, 

a Hindu named Hemu. Under his leadership, Delhi itself was 
captured, and the young Akbar was reduced to a refugee. 
Akbar’s advisors counseled retreating to the traditional stronghold 
of Kabul and conceding the loss of India, but in this crisis, Akbar 

revealed himself to be a youth in the mold of the young Babur. 

Supported by Bairam Khan, an experienced Mughal general, Akbar 

decided to march south immediately and challenge Hemu for 
control over Delhi.The Second Battle of Panipat (1556) Hemu decided to face Akbar at Panipat and dispatched his advance 
guard and artillery well ahead of his main army. This decision turned 

out to be a major mistake, because Akbar’s own advance forces 

detected the inadequately guarded cannons, and the commander of 
Akbar’s advance force immediately launched an attack. 
This sudden strike caught Hemu’s men by surprise, and they ran, 
abandoning the guns. The result was that Akbar captured Hemu’s 

entire artillery park intact and used it to augment his own cannons. 
Thus, in the coming battle, Hemu had no cannons, while Akbar 
 had many.
Despite this setback, Hemu moved with his main army to Panipat, and on November 5, 1556, the battle was fought. The true strength 

of Hemu’s army was around 30,000 skilled Rajput and Afghan 

horsemen and 500 to 1,000 war elephants, many of which were 
encased in heavy plate armor. 
The smaller Mughal army had around 10,000 to 15,000 excellent horse archers, supplemented by some infantry and the matchlock 
men and artillerymen. The true commander on the Mughal side was 
120Lecture 17: 1526 & 1556 Panipat—Babur & Akbar in India
the experienced general, Bairam Khan. Akbar was present, though 
he seems to have been stationed well to the rear and probably 
played little role in the actual oversight of the battle. 

wing, a larger center block, a substantial advance force, and a reserve, 

all fronted by war elephants, with their leaders in the center. 
Hemu’s right and left wings ferociously attacked their Mughal 
counterparts, led by the heavily armored elephants and backed up 

by elite cavalrymen. Both the Mughal wings began to give ground 
before the vicious onslaught, but the Mughal soldiers did not panic 
and maintained their formations. Meanwhile, elements of the Mughal cavalry on the extreme right 
and left sides rode in wide, sweeping arcs around the edges of 





the forces immediately around him and organized a series of 

counterattacks, which succeeded in driving off the harassing 

Mughal cavalry columns. 
He then turned his attention to a renewed frontal assault against the Mughals. Some sources claim that this attack was on the verge 

of breaking the Mughal formation, which almost certainly would 
have led to victory, when an arrow found the weak spot of Hemu’s 

helmet and pierced his eye. Seeing their general fall, his soldiers 

Effects of the Second Battle
door for their advance into India, and the second, 30 years later, 

Akbar ruled for a half-century, becoming the greatest of the 
Mughal emperors. He and his armies conquered much of the Indian 121subcontinent and established a dynasty that continued until the arrival of the British several centuries later. 
Akbar was an energetic ruler who profoundly changed the culture 
and institutions of India. He patronized the arts, established the 
Mughal capital at Agra, regularized the currency, reformed the 

nobility, reorganized the military, restructured taxation, and to 

some degree, transitioned the Mongol steppe raiders into a more 
sedentary lifestyle. Despite these accomplishments, however, it 

should not be forgotten that the Mughals were, in essence, invaders, 

and their conquests were accompanied by copious bloodshed.
established—the true legacy of the battles of Panipat. Babur, 
The Baburnama.Sandhu, A Military History of Medieval India
.Singh, Harjett, Cannons versus Elephants.Verma and Verma, 
Decisive Battles of India through the Ages
.Wink, 
Akbar. 1. 
How did Babur’s early experiences shape or affect his later successes?
2. 
In the long run, do you think the First or the Second Battle of Panipat was more important, and why?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider122Lecture 18: 1571 Lepanto—Last Gasp of the Galleys1571 Lepanto—Last Gasp of the GalleysLecture 18By the 16th century, an annual ceremony held in the lagoon of Venice 
had become a spectacular maritime festival. The focal point of 

the ritual was the Bucentaur, the royal state galley of the Venetian 
Republic. Once this ship was launched, the doge of Venice held aloft a 

golden ring and solemnly pronounced the union of the city and the sea. This 

odd wedding ceremony symbolized the association between the prosperity 
of the Venetian Republic and its control over the Mediterranean. In earlier 



but by the mid-16th century, the ritual had become tinged with apprehension 
brought on by a new and terrifying Islamic power: the Ottoman Turks. 
The OpponentsThe Turks had burst out of Anatolia, toppling the once-mighty 
Byzantine Empire and capturing the great city of Constantinople 
in 1453. Led by contingents of elite Janissary warriors, Ottoman 
Turkish armies had beaten Persia, overrun the entire eastern 

Mediterranean, and then moved onto the sea, snapping up island 
after island and fortress after fortress. Dozens of Venetian outposts 

in the eastern Mediterranean were pillaged or captured. The remaining major outpost of Christendom in the eastern Mediterranean was the island of Cyprus, held by the Venetians, 

and in 1570, the Ottomans turned their attention to it. The threat to 


Mediterranean band together to try to stop the Turks.
The Battle of Lepanto, the largest naval battle of the Renaissance, 
was a cataclysmic struggle that pitted the seemingly unstoppable 
Ottoman Turks against a desperate Christian naval coalition that 

included the Venetians, the pope, the Knights of Malta, and Spain. 
123Not only would Lepanto prove to be a turning point in Ottoman 

years of recorded human history: the clash of oared war galleys.The ShipsThe dominant warship that had been in use was a long, slender wooden galley propelled by hundreds of oarsmen, and the tactics 
still included ramming and boarding enemy vessels. Gunpowder 
weapons had begun to make an appearance, and each Renaissance 
galley was equipped with a large cannon at the bow and a few 

smaller ones to either side. Some of the soldiers manning the deck 
of the galley were also equipped with fairly primitive handheld 
The Turks had been slower to incorporate these new weapons 
into their ships; thus, Turkish galleys tended to have somewhat 

smaller and fewer cannons. Similarly, their crews made greater 

use of the traditional missile weapons rather than the new guns. 
Although Turkish ships were typically smaller than their Christian 

counterparts, because they lacked the weight of heavy cannons, 
they were also faster and more maneuverable.


broader and heavier than war galleys and had wooden castle-like 
structures at their front ends. Up to nine heavy cannons were placed 
in these castles, and lighter ones were added along the sides and at 
The CampaignPope Pius V had brought together the Christian coalition that fought 
at Lepanto. Realizing that no single Christian power could stand up 
to the Turks, Pius made it his personal project to create a Christian 

alliance that would be strong enough to do so. 124Lecture 18: 1571 Lepanto—Last Gasp of the GalleysAccordingly, the Holy League was formed, consisting of the Papal 
States, Spain, Venice, Genoa, Tuscany, Naples, Sicily, and the 



approximately 200 ships, 30,000 soldiers, and 40,000 oarsmen. Command of the coalition settled on Don Juan of Austria. The 

and there was tension among them, especially between the 

Spanish and the Venetians.

about 200 galleys and more than 100 lighter combat vessels manned 
by roughly 30,000 soldiers and 50,000 oarsmen. Thus, the scale 

of the Battle of Lepanto was enormous, involving approximately 
140,000 men on board nearly 600 ships.Although the Holy League had been formed to defend Cyprus, assembling the forces took far too long, and the Turks were able to 

The only fortress holding out on Cyprus while the Christians assembled their forces was Famagusta, but after a bitter siege, this, too, fell to the Turks.
© Svetlana Yudina/iStock/Thinkstock.
125way across the Mediterranean to the harbor of Lepanto in the Gulf of Corinth. Strictly speaking, the loss of Cyprus also removed the urgency to 




1571, just off Scropha Point in the Gulf of Patras. 
The BattleThe Holy League deployed its ships into four squadrons: o On the left wing were 53 galleys under the command of Agostino Barbarigo. o 
the Real. o On the right were 53 galleys under the command of Gian Andrea Doria. o Behind this line was a rearguard of 38 galleys under Don 
Alvaro de Bazan. Each of the three main squadrons had two galleasses, which were 
towed to a position about 500 yards in front of the Christian battle 

line. The galleasses of the northern and central divisions made it 

to their appointed stations, but the pair assigned to the south were 

held up by contrary winds and their own unwieldiness and lagged 

to the rear. 
The Turks mirrored this formation: a center squadron of 87 galleys 

Sultana; a northern wing of 60; a southern one of 61 under the capable admiral Uluch Ali; and 

a small rearguard of 8. As was customary, the Turkish formation 

adopted a shallow crescent shape, while the Christians maintained 
a straight battle line.126Lecture 18: 1571 Lepanto—Last Gasp of the GalleysThe subsequent battle began in the north when the two galleasses 

A lucky shot holed one of the larger Turkish ships beneath the 

waterline near the bow, and it began to sink. As the Turkish galleys, 

eager to get to grips with the main line of the Holy League, sped 
past the galleasses, they took a heavy beating from the Christians’ 

guns, disrupting the Turkish formation. 

similar results, and the two lines converged. A long hand-to-hand 

struggle followed, as ships ground against one another and their 
crews swept back and forth, alternately boarding other vessels and 
being boarded themselves. The Sultana
and three separate attempts, the Sultana was boarded, its crew 

in the center continued for another half hour or so, but the Christian 
ships now had the advantage, and large numbers of Turkish galleys 

began to surrender.
In the south, the Turkish commander Uluch Ali and the Christian 
leader Andrea Doria both eschewed a head-on charge in favor of 


squadrons began to angle away further to the south, creating a gap 
between the southern squadrons and the rest of the battle. Seeing that he could not get around his foe by moving south and that some of the Christian ships had become detached from the 
main group, Uluch Ali turned his ships north and drove for the gap. 
Had Ali charged back to the center a bit earlier, he could have had 


already been won by the Holy League, and Christian ships now 
began to converge on him from all sides. By midafternoon, the 

battle was over. 
127Outcomes For the Christians, Lepanto was a stunning victory, made all the 
more glorious by being unexpected. On the other side, the Ottomans 
consoled themselves by ascribing the defeat to the inscrutable will 
of God and asserting that, when the entire campaign was considered, 

prize in Cyprus. Lepanto might have led to substantial gains for the Christians, but their always-fractious coalition quickly fell prey to rivalries 


victory of Lepanto offered them. The Mediterranean region settled 

into a standoff, with each side retreating into its own domain.

ambitions were severely and permanently checked. They could 

replace ships fairly easily, but they could not replace their trained 

crews so readily. Lepanto marked the end of major Turkish raids on 

the western Mediterranean and the effective end of their assaults on 

the key island and port outposts of Christendom. Although Ottoman ambition may have been checked on the water, 
it was by no means extinguished. The Ottoman Turks would 



and power, and their eyes soon focused on their land border 

with central Europe as the stage for their next great thrust into 



take place a century later, on the plains of central Europe, with the 

great siege of Vienna in 1683.
Beeching, The Galleys at Lepanto. Bicheno, Crescent and Cross
.Crowly, 
Empires of the Sea
.Suggested Reading128Lecture 18: 1571 Lepanto—Last Gasp of the Galleys1. 
In what ways did changing technology affect the outcome of the Battle 
of Lepanto?2. 
In what ways did leadership and decision making affect the outcome of 

the battle?Questions to Consider129
Lecture 19In July of 1592, the Japanese commander who stood overlooking the Bay of Sacheon in Korea was probably quite pleased. The invasion of Korea 

was proceeding as planned; a force of more than 160,000 Japanese 
samurai had captured Pusan, Korea’s main port, then marched north and 

seized the capital city of Seoul. The great Japanese warlord Toyotomi 

Hideyoshi, the mastermind behind the invasion, was well on his way to 
extending his dominion to include Korea and, using that foothold, to conquer 
China. The only blotch on the invasion’s record of triumphs occurred 

when an unusually aggressive Korean admiral, Yi Sun-shin had caught and 

destroyed several dozen Japanese vessels. Now, this same Yi Sun-shin had 

been sighted sailing into Sacheon Bay.
The Battle of SacheonOn July 8, 1592, the Korean admiral Yi Sun-shin had been sighted 
sailing into Sacheon Bay at the head of his squadron, and the 
commander of the Japanese invasion at once ordered his men to 

the Koreans, as soon as the Japanese warships began pouring out 
into the bay, the Koreans retreated.
The Japanese eagerly pursued, and the Korean craft suddenly turned smartly about and headed back toward the Japanese. The apparent 




engage the Koreans. Then a terrifying sight emerged: A dragon’s head spitting smoke 

no open deck, and no humans were visible; instead, the creature 
had a curved, humped back formed from interlocking hexagonal 
plates with sharp, tapering spines. From small holes along its sides, 130
cannons discharged a deadly hail. This monster plunged into the 
midst of the Japanese ships, spewing death and destruction.While the creature wreaked havoc and confusion among the 
vessels, stood at a distance and bombarded the Japanese with 
cannons and arrows. The Battle of Sacheon turned into a slaughter, with the confused 
Japanese trapped between the guns of the impregnable monster and 
the storm of missiles from the Korean ships that surrounded them. The battle marked the combat debut of the turtle ship. Over the next decade, Yi and his turtle ships would play a key role in defeating 

Japan’s invasions of Korea, and Yi’s actions would establish him as 

one of the greatest admirals of all time. The OpponentsYi Sun-shin was born in 1545 and decided to pursue a military 

Yi attempted to pass the rigorous military entrance examinations, 

he fell off his horse, breaking his leg. Though he knew he had failed 

the exam, he splinted the break using the branch of a nearby tree 
and completed the exercise. After passing the exam in a later year, 

he rose through the ranks, distinguishing himself in action.Advancement in the Korean political and military structure was heavily based on favoritism and patronage rather than ability, and 


court, Yi was the commander of a small contingent of the Korean 

Yi kept a diary that has mostly survived and is available in English 

descriptions it gives of major battles and key events surrounding the 
invasion of Korea, it also offers a unique and humanizing portrait of 

131At the Battle of Sacheon, one of the very few casualties was suffered by Admiral Yi, who was shot in the shoulder by a Japanese 

musket. This incident also proved prophetic, in that Yi would suffer 

several more combat injuries, culminating in his death in battle.The driving force behind the invasion was the Japanese warlord Toyotomi Hideyoshi. He joined the army of one of Japan’s lords as 

a common foot soldier, repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, 

and rose to the level of general. Some opportune deaths combined with his own talent and ambition allowed Hideyoshi to become one of the major powers in Japan, 
island of Japan, Kyoshu. The conquest of Kyoshu had involved a 

large-scale amphibious landing, and this may have given Hideyoshi 

the idea for the invasion of Korea.Kyoshu is separated from the Korean mainland by only 30 miles of water, known as the Tsushima straits. Several islands in the 

straits provide useful way points and visual guidance. It is an easy 
crossing—not only an important trade route but an invasion path 
both to and from Japan.Japanese Naval Warfare 
For the Japanese, battles at sea were simply extensions of land combat, and they attempted to use similar tactics. Thus, Japanese 

warships were designed less as weapons in their own right than as 
platforms for infantry, and the main tactic in naval battles was to 



hand-to-hand. Primitive cannon were in use but were rarely placed 


from the personal weapons carried by her crew. 
The samurai had a long tradition of excellence at archery, and 
every samurai would have been trained in the use of the Japanese 
longbow. Recently, however, gunpowder had arrived on Japanese 
132

armed with an early form of musket.The largest and most specialized type of Japanese warship, 
ataka 
bune


line of oars projected from a lower row of holes, and there was 

usually one mast with a square sail, typically lowered during 



stationed and sometimes a tower. The crew consisted of around 80 



and not very seaworthy.
Next in size was the seki bune, basically a smaller version of the ataka bune. It had a tapered bow and was either partially enclosed 
or had a waist-high railing protecting the crew. Somewhat more 

maneuverable, it carried around 40 oarsmen and 30 soldiers.The smallest, swiftest craft was the kobaya, which had an open deck and was really just a small ship carrying some soldiers. To 

offer some token protection, the Japanese often built a wooden 

framework from which were hung fabric screens. These might 

offer enough resistance to catch an arrow that was nearly spent, but 

would not have stopped a more forceful projectile.Korean Naval Warfare
The Koreans approached naval combat with a different strategy. 
Rather than closing with the enemy and boarding, they preferred 
to stand off at a distance and bombard an enemy vessel with 

The standard Korean warship, the panokson, was medium-sized and had two decks: an enclosed lower one that protected the rowers 

models might also have a tower on the upper deck. They were 

solidly constructed to bear the weight of cannons. 133Each panokson had a variety 
of cannons of different sizes 



and iron cannonballs, as well 
as incendiary bombs. The 

Koreans also used them to 
propel enormous wooden 
arrows equipped with iron tips 
and leather vanes, said to cause 
massive destruction when they 
struck their target.
Admiral Yi’s famed turtle 
ships were propelled by the 
usual mixture of oars and a 
mast carrying a square sail, but 
because of their shape, they 
were especially maneuverable. 
They mounted about six cannon 
on each side, with several more 
Because of its especially sturdy design and thick protection, the 
turtle ship was capable of ramming its opponents, but the preferred 
method of combat was to sink enemy vessels with shots from its 
The Battle of Hansan Island Recognizing the danger Yi posed, Hideyoshi ordered his generals to 
destroy Yi and his ships, leading to Yi’s greatest victory, the Battle 

of Hansan Island. Yi again used a false retreat by to lure the Japanese into a stretch 
of open water near Hansan Island. The Japanese raced after the 

Korean ships and found themselves confronting the main Korean The turtle ships designed by Admiral Yi would play a key role 





establish him as one of the 
greatest admirals of all time.© Brücke-Osteuropa/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain.
134

drawn toward the center of this formation, where Yi encircled them. 
At the center of the Korean formation were the turtle ships, and Yi now ordered these to move forward to engage and hold the 

Japanese, while the panokson circled around them and began their 
bombardment. Once again, the Japanese were slaughtered, and the 
Outcomes Korea was weakened and devastated by the Japanese invasion, but the spirited defense offered by the Koreans eventually became a 

foundation of nationalism and independence. 
to acquire an empire on the mainland of Asia—a dark ambition 

revived with global effects in the 20
th century. 
Park, Yi-Sun Shin and His Turtleboat Armada
. Turnbull, 
The Samurai Invasion of Korea
. ———, Fighting Ships of the Far East, vol. 2.Yi, 
War Diary of Admiral Yi Sun-Sin
. 1. 
How do the various ship designs described in this lecture highlight 
2. 
How do you evaluate Admiral Yi’s qualities as a commander compared 

to other “great” leaders, such as Ramesses, Alexander, Genghis Khan, 

or Babur?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider1351600 Sekigahara—Samurai ShowdownLecture 20On the eve of a civil war in Japan, two friends spent a convivial evening together. They were Tokugawa Ieyasu, the most powerful 

lord in Japan, and Torii Mototada, the commander of one of 
Tokugawa’s castles. The next morning, the friends parted, knowing they 

would never meet again. Both understood that as soon as war broke out, 
their enemies would attack the castle; Mototada and the defenders would 
be outnumbered, yet as samurai, they would willingly stay and die for their 
lord. Soon after, 40,000 warriors besieged the castle, but Mototada held them 

off for 10 days, giving Tokugawa time to muster his own armies. Tokugawa 

went on to confront his enemies at the Battle of Sekigahara, the most decisive 
battle of the samurai era. The OpponentsThe Battle of Sekigahara would turn on the personalities of three people, all of whom had ties to Toyotomi Hideyoshi, the great 


that had been repelled by Admiral Yi and his turtle ships. 
The last of the unsuccessful Korean invasions had been dispatched in 1597 under the command of Toyotomi’s adopted son, a young 



commander; much of the real decision making was done by a 
council of generals whose squabbling was a major factor in the 
failure of the expedition. As the notional commander, Kobayakawa was summoned back 
to Japan in disgrace. Toyotomi apparently planned to punish him 

for his failure, but Tokugawa, who was already one of the most 

important lords in Japan, persuaded Toyotomi to be lenient.
Tokugawa was an experienced and wily general who had fought 
many battles and was a skilled tactician and strategist. He had 136Lecture 20: 1600 Sekigahara—Samurai Showdownhelped Toyotomi gain control of Japan while biding his time and 
building up his own strength. He was in his mid-50s and at the apex 
of his wealth and power, with a network of allies who were loyal 

friends. Yet in his climb to prominence, he had made a number of 

enemies, and there were many who resented his prosperity.

powerful lords, including Tokugawa, to act as a council of regents 

son was old enough to rule. The leader of this group was Ishida Mitsunari, a descendant of a famous family that had fallen on hard times. It was these three 
men: Tokugawa, the powerful general and wealthy lord; Ishida, the 

clever administrator; and Kobayakawa, the young samurai, who 
would determine the outcome at Sekigahara.Soon, two coalitions began to emerge: one centered on Tokugawa 
and his long-time friends and allies and the other surrounding 


faction because Ishida was defending the legacy and wishes 
of Kobayakawa’s adoptive father, Toyotomi. This was also the 

group that supported the claim of Kobayakawa’s adoptive brother, 

Toyotomi’s 5-year old son. On the other hand, Kobayakawa 

remembered the great favor that Tokugawa had done for him after 

the Korean debacle. The Armies and Their Technology
The armies at Sekigahara fought with nearly identical weapons  and armor. 

o 
a variety of weapons, including sword and bow. Some were 

mounted, although many fought on foot. o The ashigaru were lower-ranked and carried long stabbing 
spears called yari
matchlocks. 137Guns were a relatively new innovation, probably 
introduced by Portuguese 
traders in the mid-1500s, and 
the Japanese quickly learned 
to manufacture them. On 


thus armed were deployed 
in mass blocks, where 
their volleys would have a  

shock effect. 
Soldiers were equipped with a variety of body 

armor, ranging from solid 

breastplates to cuirasses 
formed of hundreds of 
metal plates held together 
with intricate bindings. 
This armor was frequently 
lacquered and, thus, could be brightly colored. Metal helmets were 
standard, as were shin and arm guards. Military units were not 
standardized; each lord organized his men as he wished. 
The BattleThe actual battle was preceded by several months of hostilities, during which each side attempted to seize key castles occupied 
by the other. Ishida’s forces captured the castle of Fushimi, held 

by Tokugawa’s friend Mototada. Other Ishida-faction armies took 

Tanabe Castle and Otsu Castle, but these local victories obviously 

occupied some of Ishida’s forces so that they were not present at 

Sekigahara. Meanwhile, Tokugawa’s generals seized the strategically located 
Gifu Castle, but Tokugawa’s son allowed himself to be delayed 

unnecessarily in attempting to take Ueda Castle. All these moves 

were like a chess game, in which the opposing sides sometimes Samurai were bound by a rigid code of behavior, sometimes called 

bushido—“the way of the warrior.”
© Vassil/Wikimedia Commons/Public Domain.
138Lecture 20: 1600 Sekigahara—Samurai Showdownexpended strength to gain a strategic location or deliberately 
 in another. 
Much of the maneuvering concerned control of two key roads: the coastal Tokaido road and the inland Nakasendo road. There is a 

point at which the main Japanese island of Honshu narrows, and 
both roads must squeeze through a slender gap between Lake Biwa 




October 16, 1600. Sekigahara lies in a constricted valley. Ishida’s forces converged 
here on the night of October 15 and deployed on the hillsides and 
on bits of high ground, arrayed in a roughly semicircular shape. 
Ishida’s plan was to force Tokugawa’s army to cross the swampy 


they would be surrounded on three sides. 
from there, contingents under various lords stretched south in a 
curving line. Near the center was a block of 17,000 troops under the 


stationed at the head of 16,000 of his own men. Across the valley, Tokugawa positioned himself on a hillside behind 
a double line of units totaling around 40,000. He held back his own 
30,000 personal retainers in a block beside him as a reserve. Both armies entered the valley during the night, but a thick mist obscured their movements so that neither was sure where the other 
was. As dawn broke, one of Tokugawa’s lords sprang forward at the 

head of 30 of his mounted samurai and launched a charge against 

Ukita’s center division. Following his lead, other Tokugawa units 

charged straight across the valley and engaged Ishida’s center and 

left divisions. 139Ishida’s men were managing to resist the assault, but as he looked 
along the line, he noticed that one important contingent under 
Lord Shimazu was not participating. When messengers brought 

no explanation, Ishida went personally to see Shimazu and was 
brusquely informed that Shimazu would enter the battle when the 
time was right. By late morning, most of Tokugawa’s forces, except for his reserve, 


was the moment that Ishida had been waiting for, and he gave the 

signal for Kobayakawa to descend from the hillside and engage 
Tokugawa’s army from the side. Kobayakawa did not respond. 

Even worse from Ishida’s perspective, several minor lords on the 



their troops, as well. Across the valley, Tokugawa was keeping an eye on Kobayakawa’s 
formation, well aware of the danger that Kobayakawa posed to 

on what the young lord would choose to do. Finally, Tokugawa 

determined to force Kobayakawa’s decision; thus, he ordered a few 


The shots had an immediate effect. Kobayakawa sprang to his 
feet and exclaimed, “Our target is Otani!”—one of Ishida’s 

commanders. Kobayakawa’s men poured down the mountain and 

smashed into Otani’s regiment. Kobayakawa had chosen to switch 

sides and join Tokugawa.
This treachery did not come as a total surprise to Ishida and his men. They had been aware of Kobayakawa’s long vacillation, and 

Otani in particular had been so suspicious of his supposed ally that 
he had ordered a section of his men to be ready to turn and face 
Kobayakawa if he switched sides. Thus, Kobayakawa’s attack did 

not have the destructive impact it might have had against a wholly 
unprepared foe. 140Lecture 20: 1600 Sekigahara—Samurai Showdown
disadvantage that multiplied when the minor lords who had also 
been delaying now followed Kobayakawa’s lead, switched sides, 

and threw their lot in with Tokugawa. 

but it was much too late, and the tide was now turning against 
Ishida. With Tokugawa’s forces pressing in from the front and 

Kobayakawa’s from the side, Ishida’s lines began to buckle, and 

individual commanders and units started to break away. By early 

afternoon, the victory would be Tokugawa’s. 
OutcomesAfter Sekigahara, Tokugawa’s power was unrivaled. He 
redistributed land to reward his lords and punish his enemies. The 

still preadolescent son of Toyotomi Hideyoshi, in whose name 

Ishida had fought, was granted a large territory and allowed to 

live in Osaka castle. In 1615, however, trumped-up charges were 

brought against him, the castle was besieged, and the last members 
of the Toyotomi clan were either killed or committed suicide. 
In 1603, Tokugawa took the title of shogun and effectively became 

he continued to manipulate events behind the scenes. The dynasty 

that he founded, the Tokugawa shogunate, continued to rule Japan 

for approximately 250 years.Bryant, Sekigahara 1600.Sansom, A History of Japan, 1334–1615
.Turnbull, 
Battles of the Samurai.Suggested Reading1411. 


culture at this time?2. 
Which side do you think Kobayakawa should have chosen to align 
himself with and why?Questions to Consider142Lecture 21: 1683 Vienna—The Great Ottoman Siege
1683 Vienna—The Great Ottoman Siege
Lecture 21On August 6, 1682, outside one of the gates to Topkapi Palace in 
Istanbul, seven standards were planted in the earth, indicating that 
the sultan was poised to embark on a campaign. This sultan was 
Mehmed IV of the mighty Ottoman Empire, and the military expedition thus 



capture Vienna, a city that had stood for centuries as a fortress protecting 


one great Ottoman onslaught in 1528. Mehmed was determined to end 


conquerors of the past, and to bring Vienna to its knees.
The OpponentsClearly a primary motive for the campaign to take Vienna was 
Mehmed IV’s ambition to go down in history as one of the great 

conquering sultans. Early in his reign, he had achieved successes 
both in the Mediterranean and in Europe, but he needed one 
spectacular military victory to cement his reputation.Mehmed’s grand vizier at the time of the attack on Vienna was Kara 
Mustafa Pasha. His origins are somewhat mysterious. By virtue 
of either talent or personality, he rose quickly from messenger to 

military commander to minor vizier and, eventually, was appointed 



conquest of several Aegean islands, leading to his appointment as 


The Ottoman Turkish army had long enjoyed a reputation for 
innovation and excellence, but its tactics were beginning to stagnate. 

o In keeping with its steppe traditions, it still included a large 
contingent of heavily armored sipahi horsemen, who could 
143o These were augmented by units of Tatar light cavalry, who still 
fought, like their Mongol ancestors, as horse archers practicing 
hit-and-run tactics. o The infantry included engineers and artillerymen, as well as foot soldiers. The elite troops of the Ottoman Turks remained the Janissaries, 
trained like the Mamluks in military academies, where they were 
converted to Islam and raised to be fanatically loyal and well-

sword, bow, or gun.
One weakness of the Ottoman army was its artillery. Although 
the Turks possessed large cannon well-suited to battering down 



Vienna logistically impracticable. Thus, they had to subdue Vienna 

The Turks hoped to make up for this defect by the excellence of 
their sapper corps, which tunneled beneath the walls and set off 

mines to demolish them. The Turks were particularly skilled at this 

sort of warfare, and the attacking army contained large numbers of 

experienced miners and engineers.Facing this threat was Leopold I, the ruler of Austria and the Holy 
Roman Emperor. He was a member of the Hapsburg family, which 

controlled many countries; Leopold knew multiple languages and 
was an avid reader and student of history. Probably his greatest 

defect as a leader was vacillation. The CampaignThe Ottoman army that set out for Vienna in October 1682 probably 
consisted of around 100,000 men. By the end of June 1683, the 
Turkish force moved into enemy territory and bore down on Vienna.
144Lecture 21: 1683 Vienna—The Great Ottoman Siege
As the Turkish army steadily advanced, Leopold and his advisors 
dithered over what the Turks’ objective was, thus preventing any 

decisive steps to defend Vienna. When Leopold was indecisive, 

he relied heavily on prayer; during the crucial last month before 
the Turks arrived, rather than fortifying the defenses or bringing 

in reinforcements, Leopold ordered that prayers be recited in St. 
Stephen’s Cathedral 24 hours a day and that all members of the 

city’s guilds attend. 
Leopold not only attended services but continued his normal routine, even going hunting outside the city as late as July 6. The 

next day, new reports testifying to the rapid approach of the Turks, 



broke through. Suddenly acknowledging the reality and proximity 
of the threat, Leopold abruptly announced that the royal family and 


had to be summoned. Von Starhemberg faced a daunting task: The 

Turks would arrive in six days, the garrison numbered only about 



had not been fully provisioned for a siege. By the time the Turks 
arrived on July 14, 
Vienna’s garrison 

numbered about 
15,000 men, and more 
than 300 cannons of 
various sizes were 
available to the 
defenders. The defenders’ 
greatest concern was 
the city walls. Another crucial weapon in good supply was hand grenades—80,000 had been 
stockpiled, and nearly all would be 
© Red Baron 2/Wikimedia Commons/CC BY-SA 3.0.
145o 
obsolete the high stone walls of medieval fortresses, which 
proved too brittle to resist the smashing effects of cannonballs. 



to feature extremely thick, but relatively low earthen 
embankments that could absorb a cannonball’s impact. 
o Also, the straight walls of medieval castles had been replaced with star-shaped fortresses whose sides were studded with 

projecting triangular bastions. They also commonly featured 

detached triangular outworks, called ravelins, situated beyond 
the main walls. All these were built on along carefully 



cannons and muskets mounted on the projecting bastions and 


in one section able to blast away any attackers threatening a 
neighboring section. o 
ideal. Some stretches of the wall were soundly designed, but 
others constituted weak spots certain to draw the attention of 
a knowledgeable attacker. Unfortunately for the defenders of 

Vienna, the Turks were experienced at siege warfare.
The SiegeArriving at Vienna on July 14, Kara Mustafa erected his tent 
opposite the most vulnerable point. The defense of this section 

depended on two bastions projecting from the walls and an outwork 
just in front of them. The defenders knew that this was their weak 

spot, and roughly half the garrison was assigned to defend it.Kara Mustafa sent an envoy to the defenders bearing a demand for surrender. It was rejected, and the siege began. About 20,000 of the 

Turks were directly engaged in the siege, while the other 70,000 

cut off the city from outside aid and ravaged the countryside. 

Meanwhile, the Tatar light cavalry engaged in long-range raids, 

traveling hundreds of miles into enemy territory.
146Lecture 21: 1683 Vienna—The Great Ottoman Siege
Within 24 hours, the Turkish engineers had dug protected positions 
for their cannons, made an observation bunker for Kara Mustafa 
overlooking the key zone, and begun a series of trenches toward the 
walls. By July 22, the trenches had advanced within a few feet of 

mine was set off on July 23, followed by a larger one on July 25 

that blew up part of a bastion. Janissaries poured into the breach but 
On August 12, the Turks exploded two especially large mines, 
blasting a clear pathway into the outwork. Despite desperate efforts 



battle lasting several hours, succeeded in capturing the ravelin. The 

Von Starhemberg took an active role in the defense, personally 
leading a countercharge against some Turks who had gained a 

foothold on the walls and organizing sorties to harass the Turkish 

digging parties. On August 25, one of these was so successful that 


cannons. The Viennese could not disable the guns, however, and 

retreated, having suffered 200 casualties
On August 27, von Starhemberg ordered that rockets be discharged 
from the spire of St. Stephen’s Cathedral to signal that the garrison 

could not hold out much longer. By September 8, both the bastions 

were so heavily damaged that their effectiveness was greatly 



down to 4,000. While Vienna stubbornly resisted, Leopold had formed an alliance 
with Poland-Lithuania and had been assembling a relief army led 
by King Jan Sobieski and Charles, duke of Lorraine. They had 

amassed a force of around 60,000 that was especially strong in 
heavy cavalry. 
147The Turks had neglected to establish strong defenses against an 

through the Wienerwald to the outskirts of Vienna before dawn on 

September 12. Kara Mustafa hurriedly assigned about half his army 
to meet this new threat, orienting them into a battle line. The result became known as the Battle of Kahlenberg. It unfolded 
in a confused series of encounters as the two sides advanced along 
a four-mile front over rough terrain. By late afternoon, the allied 

army had nosed forward onto the plains leading to Vienna, and both 

Charles on the left and Sobieski on the right sensed that the crucial 
moment had arrived. Both ordered their men to the attack. Although the Turks resisted bravely, this charge proved decisive, 
and the Ottoman lines disintegrated. Kara Mustafa escaped, taking 
with him what was left of the army’s treasury, but most of his army 

was destroyed. In the campaigns that immediately followed, the 
Ottomans lost a chunk of their European territory, including, most 

importantly, Hungary. 
Much of the previous 200 years of European history had been dominated by Turkish attempts to expand their reach into Western 

Europe, resulting in a series of epic sieges and battles. Vienna 

decisively marked the end of these attempts and was the turning 
point in Ottoman history. 
Millar, 
Vienna 1683
.Stoye, The Siege of Vienna
.Wheatcroft, The Enemy at the Gate.Suggested Reading148Lecture 21: 1683 Vienna—The Great Ottoman Siege
1. 
What factors that are important in siege warfare do not play as great a 2. 
What should the Ottoman Turks have done differently that might have 

resulted in a victory at Vienna?
Questions to Consider149
Lecture 22The Battle of Poltava in 1709 marked a turning point in military 

shifted from edged weapons driven by human muscle, such as swords, spears, and arrows, to cannons and guns using gunpowder to propel bullets, 
shells, or cannonballs. One of the main agents for this transformation came 
from a perhaps unexpected quarter: the rather obscure kingdom of Sweden.Military Innovations in Sweden In 1611, 17-year-old Gustavus Adolphus ascended to the throne of 
Sweden. He proved to be a far-sighted military genius, radically 


and mobility. He introduced a new, much lighter musket and 

reversed the percentage of his infantry who carried guns versus 

weapon of an army. 
Gustavus equipped the Swedish army with three standard-size cannons, emphasizing light cannons that could be drawn by a few 
horses and deployed in accordance with troop movements on the 

organized into regiments. 
Using his new, modern army, Gustavus embarked on a series of 
spectacularly successful campaigns and turned Sweden into the 
most powerful state in northern Europe. By the late 1600s, Sweden 
dominated Scandinavia and the Baltic Sea and had acquired 
footholds in Germany that allowed it to control commerce on three 
of Germany’s major rivers. 
The OpponentsIn 1697, 15-year-old Charles XII came to the throne. Sweden’s chief 
victims over the previous century—Denmark, Poland, and Russia—150
sensed an opportunity to take advantage of the inexperience and youth of the new monarch. The result was the Great Northern War: 

Denmark invaded Schleswig-Holstein, Poland attacked Riga, and 
the Russians invaded Livonia. Unfortunately for them, Charles XII turned out to be a military leader fully as talented as his ancestors. Now 18, he personally 


in Poland that lasted several years and produced at least six  major victories. Charles XII’s personal role model was Alexander the Great. Well 
aware that Alexander had conquered a vast eastern empire with a 

relatively small army, Charles now determined to invade Russia 

and capture Moscow. The army with which Charles proposed to do 

this numbered around 40,000. On September 7, 1707, Charles and 
his forces crossed the Oder 
River into Poland. His opponent was another young, determined ruler: 
Peter I of Russia, who came 
to the throne determined 
to change Russia’s feudal 

economic and social 
structure. He was fascinated 
by technology and had 
traveled extensively in 
Western Europe, eagerly 

absorbing the most 
sophisticated cultural and 

 the age. One of Peter’s desires was 

Peter the Great is known for 
even worked incognito in an English 
shipyard to learn techniques for 
constructing warships.© Pedro Antonio Salaverría Calahorra/iStock/Thinkstock.
151naval power, but he needed access to either the Baltic or the 
Crimean Sea, preferably both. The Swedes blocked his way in the 

north and the Turks, in the south.
At the time of Charles’s invasion, Peter had begun his 
modernization of the Russian army, probably most successful in 

the area of upgrading the army’s gunpowder weapons, from the 

common soldier’s musket up to heavy siege cannons. The Russian 

army was especially well-equipped with a large number of modern 
 artillery pieces. The Campaign Peter adopted a strategy emulated during later invasions of Russia by Napoleon and Hitler. His army retreated before the advancing 

Swedes and enacted a policy of destroying farms, burning crops, 
and forcing the invaders to maintain long supply lines. Peter was 
also counting on one of Russia’s most potent defensive strengths: 

its long, terrible winters. Peter’s other secret weapon was the vast size of Russia: He could 
afford to surrender huge chunks of territory, luring the Swedes 

farther from home, reinforcements, and supplies. The Swedish army crossed the Vistula River in December 1707 
and steadily progressed across Poland and into Lithuania before 
halting for the winter in February. The army moved forward again 

in June, and there were several skirmishes and minor battles with 
the Russians. Peter and his main army shadowed the Swedes but 
would not commit to a decisive battle, thus drawing Charles deeper 
into Russia. The supply question was becoming critical, and Charles’s best bet 
seemed to be to turn south toward the Ukraine, although this would 
divert his march away from Moscow. When some Ukraine-based 

Cossack groups rebelled against Peter and offered to join Charles, 

also offering to feed his starving army, his decision to turn south 

was reinforced. 152
The winter of 1708–1709 turned out to be one of the coldest and harshest in memory. Charles’s army plodded forward, continuing 

the campaign through the winter. After several skirmishes with the 

Russians, it came to a stop on the main road from Kiev to Kharkov 
at a point between the Vorskla and Psiol rivers. 
The Russians were encamped nearby, outside the small town of 
Poltava. Disease, combat, and the winter had whittled Charles’s 


only was food running short, but the remaining store of gunpowder 
was limited and of questionable quality. 
On June 17, Charles was inspecting his outposts along the Vorskla 
River when he was struck in the foot by a Russian musket ball. He 
was used to leading from the front in battle, personally directing 
charges and rousing his men with his example, but this injury was 

severe enough that he had to be carried in a litter at the Battle of 

Poltava, both limiting his mobility and depriving his men of his 
crucial inspiration. The BattlePeter entrenched his main army, about 25,000 infantry and 73 

few miles north of Poltava. To get at the camp, the Swedish army 

would have to pass through a gap between two dense woods 
to the southwest. Across this gap, Peter had erected a row of six 

redoubts: miniature rectangular or triangular earthen forts spaced 

at 150-meter intervals. He then built four more redoubts at a right 
Together, the redoubts formed a T and were manned by about 
5,000 soldiers with 16 cannons. To attack the main Russian force, 

the Swedish army had to pass these small forts, which could pour 


cavalry, about 9,000 men, in a line behind the redoubts. 
153Charles’s plan for the battle seems daring, even foolhardy. His 
available resources were about 8,000 infantry, 7,000 cavalry, and 

four small cannons. He proposed to rush this small force past the 
lines of redoubts before dawn, then assault the main Russian camp. Things began to go wrong almost at once. The infantry was 
supposed to lead, with the cavalry following close behind, but the 
two groups lost contact, and the infantry had to pause until the 
cavalry was located and brought forward, delaying the attack. Worse, the Swedes were detected by the redoubts, which opened 

away were able to stay focused and hurry past, but those closer to 
Had the Swedish units continued moving forward after subduing the redoubts, they might have prevailed. But a group of six battalions, 
one-third of the entire Swedish infantry, under the command of 

General Roos, stopped altogether and became enmeshed in a brutal 
Meanwhile, the remaining infantry and the cavalry forged past the 
redoubts onto the plain in front of the Russian camp. Charles’s 

forces had been badly mauled in passing the redoubts, but it 

seemed that they could proceed with the plan. Charles began to 

assemble and organize his forces in preparation for an assault on 

the main Russian camp. But he now realized that a third of his 

infantry was missing. 
Roos had stubbornly continued to assault the third redoubt in a series of futile attacks. Having lost 40 percent of his men, he 
withdrew to a nearby wood, where the Russians pounced. After 


down to 20 percent of his original men. He surrendered. Back out on the plain, every minute the Swedes delayed, they lost 
154
began to deploy in a line facing them. Now 22,000 fresh Russian troops began to march forward against the thin line of tired Swedish 
infantry, who numbered no more than 4,000. 
The two lines began about 800 meters apart. As the range decreased 


gaps in the Swedish line. At 200 meters, the Russian cannons 

switched from solid balls to grapeshot and scrap metal that spewed 
a storm of lethal fragments into the Swedish ranks. Finally, at 50 meters, the Russian infantry, four ranks deep, lowered 
their muskets and unleashed a colossal volley. All this time, the 



discharged their muskets in one volley, and charged. 
Astonishingly, on the Swedish right, the thin, ragged line of infantry 
actually began to force back the thicker Russian formation. On the 
left, however, the line began to falter. The longer Russian line now 

closed around the Swedes, trapping and attacking them from three 
sides. Under this pressure, the Swedish charge faltered, and the 

battle was transformed into a slaughter. 
OutcomesThe Battle of Poltava marked the end of the Swedish Empire and of Sweden’s role as a great military power. The state that had looked 

poised to establish a northern empire under a succession of dynamic 
leaders was now reduced to a relatively minor polity.
Conversely, Poltava also marked the rise of Russia as an important 
international power that would continue to play a major role in 

Peter’s position and enabled him to complete his process of 

modernizing Russia and incorporating it into the European 
economic and political sphere. 155Englund, The Battle That Shook Europe
.Konstam, Poltava 1709. Massie, Peter the Great
.1. 


2. 
Do you think Charles or Peter was the better leader, and why?
Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider156Lecture 23: 1759 Quebec—Battle for North America
1759 Quebec—Battle for North America
Lecture 23In 1754, an ambitious but inexperienced 23-year-old lieutenant colonel in 
the Virginia militia was dispatched with a small contingent of soldiers to 

a disputed area of western Pennsylvania. There, he was to locate French 
troops who were constructing a fort and order them to depart from what the 
British considered to be their territory. When his demands were ignored, 





the young lieutenant colonel’s name was George Washington; second, the 

episode initiated a chain of events that helped spark a war between England 
and France.Backdrop to the Battle

entrenched along the Atlantic seaboard with a population of 

approximately 1.5 million. But colonial expansion was hampered 
by the French conviction that the land west of the Appalachians 
 was theirs. Although the French in North America numbered just 70,000, they 
laid claim to a vast diagonal band of territory stretching from the St. 

Lawrence River through the Great Lakes to New Orleans. Daring 
voyageurs traveled westward through the Great Lakes and explored 
south along the Mississippi and Ohio rivers, establishing a series 
of trading posts and forts along the way and blocking westward 
movement by the English. After a series of escalating border incidents, in 1756, war broke out between France and England. Among the British objectives was to 

seize control of the strategic St. Lawrence waterway. Situated on a 

series of high bluffs overlooking this river was the capital of New 

France, Quebec. If Quebec could be taken, France’s main route of 
157communication and trade would be severed, and the British could lay claim to North America. 
The OpponentsJames Wolfe was from a military family, and from a young age, 
he dreamed of achieving distinction in the army. By virtue of both 

his abilities and his aggressive 
self-promotion, Wolfe ascended 



the British army with unusual 
rapidity—by the time he gained 
command of the attack on Quebec 
as a major general, he was only 32. Wolfe’s opponent at Quebec 
was the Marquis de Montcalm, a 
French nobleman also descended 
from a long line of military 


an experienced soldier who 
was demonstrably brave on  

Although possessing a charm and sophistication that Wolfe lacked, 

Montcalm had some of the era’s 

prejudice against those he regarded 
as social inferiors. Thus, when assigned to command in North 

America, he openly expressed his disdain for both the Indians, who 
were allies of the French, and the local French Canadians. The Canadian-born governor-general of New France had an 
especially thorny relationship with Montcalm and disagreed 

radically with him over how the war should be fought. The 

governor-general advocated a kind of guerilla warfare using Indians 

and local soldiers that Montcalm found morally troubling. James Wolfe continues to 

portrayed in biographies as 
being everything from one of 
the great military geniuses 
in history to a borderline 
incompetent. © chrisdorney/iStock/Thinkstock.158Lecture 23: 1759 Quebec—Battle for North America
The CampaignQuebec is situated on a high, rocky promontory on the north side of the St. Lawrence waterway. It is protected to the east and south 

by the St. Lawrence and to the north by the St. Charles River. The 

walled Upper City stands high above the river on a plateau; the 
smaller Lower City is below, by the river. On the plateau west of 


plateau are steep cliffs dropping 200 feet to the St. Lawrence. 
The French believed that their cannons could prevent British ships from proceeding up the St. Lawrence River. To prevent British 

troops being landed further down the St. Lawrence and marching 

and strong points constructed along the northern escarpment, 
ending near a 300-foot cliff over which the Montmorency Falls 

plummeted. Montcalm nevertheless judged that this zone of the St. 
Lawrence was the most likely area for a British landing; thus, he 
To capture this stronghold, Wolfe had about 8,500 men. What it 
might have lacked in numbers, his force made up in quality: 10 
excellent battalions of British regular line infantry supplemented 
by some grenadiers, a contingent of artillerymen from the Royal 
Regiment of Artillery, and 6 companies of American rangers. 
Wolfe’s main subordinates were all young, eager, and competent. 


warships and crews that transported his army to its target. This 



gunpowder, supplies, manpower, boats, and experience with 

amphibious landings. On the other side, Montcalm had perhaps 13,000 to15,000 troops of all kinds, but the core of his forces was his 8 battalions of regular 
French infantry, although these were badly under strength and 

probably totaled no more than 5,000 men.159The British arrived in the region of Quebec in June 1759, and Wolfe 

line on the northern bank, near the Montmorency Falls. The British 

attacked in the late afternoon of July 31. The British grenadiers managed to capture one French redoubt but 
could not force their way into the main French lines. Another group 

coming along the shore bogged down, and the assault was called 
off. In addition to failing to achieve its objectives, the attempt cost 

Wolfe more than 400 prime soldiers. 
But the British had discovered that they could run ships upriver past the guns of Quebec, and Wolfe had begun a two-pronged strategy 

designed to wear down the defenders’ will to resist: a combination 

of direct bombardment and a campaign of laying waste to the 
surrounding countryside. Employing heavy cannon and mortars, Wolfe pounded the 




countryside, an estimated 1,400 farms were burned, and the region 
around Quebec was transformed into a smoking wasteland. The BattleWolfe chose a direct assault aimed at the cliffs west of the city. 
Montcalm had established a series of pickets to keep watch along 
these cliffs, but most people believed that they were too steep to 

offer a reasonable route of attack. Wolfe had noted one spot where 

a steep trail ran to the top. The trail was blocked by a barrier, there 

was a strong guard post at the top, and a nearby battery covered the 
landing site at the base of the trail, but Wolfe decided that this spot 

constituted a weak point in the defenses. He decided on a nighttime 
landing from boats that would seize control of this trail. The plan was for the assault force to start upriver and drift down silently on the current, land at the base of the trail, slaughter the 

160Lecture 23: 1759 Quebec—Battle for North America
there. The main army could then follow and strike Quebec from 
the land side. Several other diversionary attacks would be made the 
same night. The British now enjoyed a streak of luck that allowed the attack force to seize control of the vital trail.
o 
column of elite troops opposite the British ships from which 


watch on the ships and move to intercept and destroy any boats 
launched from them. On the critical night, he failed to notice 
the heavily laden boats gliding downstream on the current. o 
Captain Vergor, had been told to expect a convoy of French 

boats that night bringing supplies to the city. When the British 

boats materialized out of the darkness, the French sentries 
naturally took them for the supply convoy. 
o Some of the English boats, carried on a strongly ebbing tide, overshot the landing zone by several hundred meters and came 
ashore at the base of the cliffs where there was no apparent 

route. The light company under the command of Colonel 

Howe threw themselves at the cliff face and scrambled directly 

upward. Coming from this totally unexpected direction, they 
took the sentries guarding the top of the trail totally by surprise. Attacked on two sides by Howe’s men coming along the cliff and 
by other British troops storming up the trail, Captain Vergor’s men 


were now able to land and climb up the trail. Dawn found Wolfe and the British army of around 3,000 men 


relatively long range, and following their usual practice, individual 
soldiers shot and reloaded as fast as they were able. The British, by 
161contrast, held back until the French were 40 to 60 yards away, then 


longer, then unleashed a single, more coordinated volley. Wolfe 

had ordered his men to load their muskets with an extra ball, and 
observers recorded that the effect of this one volley was devastating 

to the French ranks. In just a few minutes, it was all over. The city 


OutcomesThe fall of Quebec was a decisive moment. The battle directly 
contributed to the birth of the United States because the British 
crown levied new, heavier taxes on the American colonies to pay 

for it: a source of considerable resentment and one of the principal 
causes of the American Revolution. 
On the French side, the war weakened the monarchy and drained the treasury, provoking harsh new taxes that contributed directly to 

the French Revolution. In the long term, the removal of French power along the 
Mississippi River and other regions in the Midwest allowed 

the newly independent American colonies to expand beyond 

the Appalachians and claim the rest of what would become the 

continental United States. 
Hibbert, Wolfe at Quebec.
 Reid, Quebec 1759: The Battle That Won Canada.
 Stacey, 
Quebec 1759: The Siege and the Battle. Suggested Reading162Lecture 23: 1759 Quebec—Battle for North America
1. 
In how many ways did luck play a role in the outcome of the battle discussed in this lecture?2. 
What do you think the long-term effects would have been if Wolfe’s 

army had been repulsed from its attack on Quebec?Questions to Consider163
Lecture 24In December of 1776, the rebellion of the American colonies against their 
British overlords looked to be coming to a dismal and premature end. 
The colonists had scored some promising early victories, but by the fall of 1776, the British Empire had struck back with a vengeance. Washington 

was forced to retreat through New York and New Jersey, and the British 

captured several key rebel fortresses. By that winter, many believed that the 

Revolution was doomed to failure. Yet from this low point—in just 10 days 

between December and January—the colonists would gain an irresistible 
momentum, thanks to the bold maneuvers of Washington and the battles at 

Trenton and Princeton.
Dark Days of the RevolutionIn the opening months of the American Revolution, everything 
had seemed to go the way of the colonists. Indeed, when the 


many thought that the war was effectively over. This triumph was 

followed during the summer by the emotional high point of the 
signing of the Declaration of Independence.In August of 1776, the British commander-in-chief, Howe, launched 
an assault on New York and defeated the Americans at Brooklyn 

Heights, the largest battle yet. George Washington, the leader of the 


In October, the British and Americans fought another major battle, 
but once more, the colonists were defeated and had to fall back. 
This process was repeated throughout the fall, as the British chased 
Washington south through New Jersey, winning a string of victories 

and swiftly capturing several key fortresses that the rebels had 
depended on to retard the British advance. 164
By December 1776, when both sides settled into winter camps, Washington had lost 90 percent of his army to death, desertion, 

division, capture, or simply because the volunteer soldiers’ short 

terms of enlistment had expired. Washington’s reputation as a good general had been erased by 
that fall’s unrelieved string of demoralizing defeats and retreats, 

meaning that no new recruits would show up for the next campaign 
season in the spring. To observers on both sides that winter, it 

seemed certain that the American experiment was coming to an 

unsurprising end as a miserable failure. Yet between December 25, 1776, and January 3, 1777, the elite 
British soldiers would be defeated not once but twice; Washington’s 

reputation as a military genius would be reestablished; and from 
this low point, the revolution would gain an irresistible momentum, 
culminating in the defeat and surrender of the British at Yorktown 



American Republic. The OpponentsThe person responsible for this turnaround was Washington 
himself. As a general, he had displayed a talent for holding together 

the often unruly and independent volunteers who made up the 
American ranks, and on the march, he habitually hovered at the end 
of the line to give encouragement to those who were lagging. The general commanding the British army was an aristocrat named 
who ordered his men to scramble directly up the steep cliffs, taking 

the French by surprise and winning the battle. Howe was a political 
moderate who disagreed with the Crown’s harsh treatment of the 

American colonies and who had considerable sympathy for them. 

mandated mission to rule. 165Howe’s older brother, Richard, had a similar career arc, but in his 
case, it was in the navy. Sent to sea at 13 as a midshipman, he, 

too, had risen quickly through the ranks, gaining a reputation for 
boldness and personal courage. He evinced an unusual degree of 

concern for the well-being of the 
sailors under his command and 
won a series of notable victories, 
becoming the youngest admiral in 

American colonies broke out, 
King George III personally asked 

the Howe brothers to take charge 

of Britain’s land and sea forces 

in North America and to resolve 

the dispute by peaceful means if 
possible but by force if necessary. 

General Charles Cornwallis. Much 
like Howe, Cornwallis was of the 
highest aristocratic stock, and he, too, served with distinction in the 
Seven Years’ War. It was his army that chased Washington across 

the length of New Jersey. 
The soldiers employed by Britain against the Americans were 
an experienced group of regular line British infantry regiments 
supported by grenadier companies, light companies, mounted 
dragoons, and mobile artillery units. The infantry typically fought 

deployed into a long line two ranks deep. Howe’s army also included a large contingent of Hessian regiments. 
These were mercenaries recruited from the Hesse-Kassel region of 
Germany. Ultimately, around 20,000 Hessians, plus another 10,000 

men from other regions of Germany, would enlist to serve in the 
The password chosen by Washington for the crossing 

of the Delaware plainly 

at stake: “victory or death.” © Georgios Kollidas/iStock/Thinkstock.
166
war against the American colonies. They were highly disciplined 
and formidable troops. The Battles
When Washington reached the Delaware River, he ferried his 
men across to Pennsylvania, then had them gather all the boats 

thus denying the British a means to cross the river and continue 
their pursuit. This stratagem, coupled with the onset of winter, 

temporarily halted the British, who now settled down in New 
Jersey, waiting for spring. 
In these extreme circumstances, Washington decided on one last 
desperate attempt before his men’s enlistment expired with the turn 

of the new year. As a target, he selected the contingent of about 

1,500 Hessians settled for the winter in Trenton, who were under 

the command of an experienced soldier, Colonel Rall. 
Washington planned a three-column assault in which his army 
would cross the Delaware at nightfall on Christmas Day and 
converge on Trenton before dawn. Washington would personally 

lead one of the attacking columns. Although the weather on 

Christmas Day had been clear, as dusk fell, a northeaster struck, 

bringing rain, snow, and biting winds. 

animals, and equipment at night and in such appalling conditions 
inevitably caused disruption to Washington’s plans. The crossing 

took far longer than he calculated, and the sun was already close to 
rising by the time Washington’s force was assembled and ready to 

begin the hike to Trenton. Worse, the weather prevented the other 

two columns from crossing at all. Washington determined to press 

on and divided his force into two sections for the march. When the columns reached the outskirts of Trenton, they overran 
the outlying Hessian pickets. Six American artillery pieces were 
167
attack began. The well-sited American cannons played a key role in dispersing 
Hessian attacks and in keeping them from organizing. As the 

Hessians began to be overwhelmed and fall back, Rall was mortally 

100 Hessians killed and wounded and more than 900 captured. 
daring and successful raid immediately captured the American 

public’s imagination and rekindled enthusiasm for the war. Howe 

immediately dispatched Cornwallis, who had not yet departed on 
his ship for England, back to New Jersey to take charge. 
Washington was determined to compound the momentum by 
launching an even more ambitious offensive, but he required 

additional manpower. He was able to consolidate under himself 

troops from other commanders, but he also needed to convince 
enough of his own veterans not to depart as their enlistment expired. 
He was able to retain about 1,400 of his experienced men, giving 
him a solid core of veterans for the coming campaign. They crossed 

over the Delaware to Trenton again and took up defensive positions 

along a ridge near Assunpink Creek. 
Intent on avenging the embarrassing defeat of the Hessians at Trenton, 
Cornwallis stormed through New Jersey, gathering forces as he went. 

As he approached Trenton, he had an army of more than 9,000 men, 

and he ordered one brigade of about 1,000 under Lieutenant Colonel 

Mawhood to hold position as a reserve at Princeton. On January 2, 

he engaged the American line at Assunpink Creek. Fighting from the 

woods and prepared positions, the Americans stubbornly resisted the 

British advance, throwing back several attacks, but steady pressure 

forced them to give ground. 


Americans were close to breaking and that when the battle resumed 168



the Americans immediately, but believing that he had Washington 

trapped, Cornwallis rejected the advice.Washington was indeed deeply worried that the next day’s battle 
would see his army caught with their backs to the river. Again, 

he decided on a bold nocturnal maneuver that would surprise and 
outwit his enemy. He gave orders for his army to sneak away from 

Trenton during the night, to march in a dangerously exposed path 

all the way around Cornwallis’s sleeping army, and to fall upon the 

British reserve left at Princeton. 



with cloths, and the soldiers were ordered to observe strict silence. 
The army remained undetected, and by dawn on January 3, the 
leading elements were approaching Princeton. The Battle of Princeton was much more of a conventional 

than either Trenton or Assunpink Creek had been. Across an open 


followed by charges and countercharges. 
At one point, Washington, conspicuous on his grey horse, rallied the 
faltering American lines by dangerously exposing himself to British 


prevailed against the outnumbered British, and Washington scored 

yet another brilliant victory. In some ways, this one was even more 

inspiring because it had shown that the American militia could go 

toe-to-toe with the British regulars and defeat them. OutcomesThe Revolutionary War continued for several more years, until 


Yorktown in 1781. But the true turning point was the twin victories 
169of Trenton and Princeton. These came at the very darkest moment 
for the Revolution, at a time when support for it was faltering and 
everything seemed to be turning against the young republic. Instead, by a series of clever and daring maneuvers, Washington 


established his reputation as a general, and saved the nascent 
revolutionary movement. From that moment on, the continuance 
of the Revolution was never again seriously in doubt, leading 
inexorably toward the colonists’ attainment of freedom from 

Great Britain. Bonk, Trenton and Princeton 1776–77
.Dwyer, 
The Day Is Ours!Fischer, 
Washington’s Crossing
. 1. 
What were Washington’s positive qualities as a commander, and which 
of them do you think was most important?2.If  Washington had lost the Battle of Trenton, do you think that the United 

States would eventually have achieved independence from Britain?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider170Lecture 25: 1805 Trafalgar—Nelson Thwarts Napoleon
1805 Trafalgar—Nelson Thwarts Napoleon
Lecture 25On January 8, 1806, an unprecedented funeral was held in England. 
The casket was conveyed down the Thames in a royal funeral 

barge; the next day, it was transferred to a hearse shaped like a 
warship that sailed through the streets to St. Paul’s Cathedral. Tens of 



The man who had been granted these honors was a warrior who had won 

a spectacular and crushing victory over a superior force and delivered 

his nation from years of desperate fear of invasion by an implacable 

and terrifying foe. At the very moment of his triumph, this hero, Horatio 

Nelson, had been struck down in battle. 
Naval War in the Age of Sail
Since the galleys had clashed at Lepanto, naval warfare had 
undergone rapid change. 

o Deep-hulled ships propelled by square-rigged sails that could tack against the direction of the wind were capable of carrying 
enough supplies to cross the oceans. o When heavy cannons were mounted on these ships, the new technology marked a new era of naval warfare. o But only one or two cannons could be mounted at the front or stern of a ship; thus, guns were positioned mainly along the 
sides. Ships could not shoot in the same direction that they 


one enemy ship. 
line up in a long column, all sailing in the same direction. The 


broadsides at one another. The two sides simply pounded one 
171
that it had to surrender. 
A typical warship of this period had two or three decks for guns. The 
largest warships carried between 64 and 120 guns. These warships 

represented an enormous investment of money and resources to 
construct, were extremely costly to operate, and incorporated the 
most cutting-edge technology of the day. 
England versus FranceThe dominant power in naval warfare in the 18th and 19
th centuries 
was England. This nation possessed a large number of excellent 

natural harbors from which the main sea routes to Europe could be 
controlled. England developed the largest merchant marine in the 


The Victory

warships—200 feet long  and 50 feet wide and carrying 102 guns.© AlamarPhotography/iStock/Thinkstock.  
172Lecture 25: 1805 Trafalgar—Nelson Thwarts Napoleon
England’s greatest enemy during this time was France, which had 
just undergone the chaos of the French Revolution and had fallen 

under the rule of an ambitious military genius, Napoleon Bonaparte. 
Through a series of astonishing and swift campaigns, Napoleon 
extended his dominion over much of Europe, from Spain to the 
borders of Russia. The instrument of his success was his Grand 


more than 700,000 men. By 1804, Napoleon’s army stood poised along the French coast, and 
he had thousands of barges constructed to ferry his troops across 

the English Channel. What stood in his way were the warships of 

the English navy. 
Against this menace, the English strategy was to preserve control of the seas by not allowing the French navy to leave its harbors. 
Outside of every major French harbor, a squadron of English 

ships kept up a constant blockade, maintained even during storms, 
placing an enormous strain on the ships and their crews. The OpponentsMany of the ships and men that sustained this vigil against the French and fought in the war at sea have become legendary, but none 

more so than Horatio Nelson. He was born in 1758 to a prosperous 
family and was sent to sea at the age of 12 as a midshipman. Nelson rose through the ranks to lieutenant and eventually captain and fought in a number of battles, in which he established a 


was also one who led from the front, a practice that took a physical 
toll: In one battle, he lost an eye, and in another, his right arm was 

shattered by a musket ball and had to be amputated. The loss did 

not impair the success of his career, however. 
By 1798, Napoleon had conquered most of Europe and decided to 

and transports to carry his army and personally took charge, sailing 
173to Egypt, landing near Alexandria, and subduing the country after 



strong defensive position near the mouth of the Nile at Aboukir Bay. 
Nelson was sent with a smaller force of ships to attempt to destroy 

aggressive fashion, he sailed to Aboukir Bay, arriving near dusk 

and, rather than waiting for the next day, attacking immediately. 
The action that followed is known as the Battle of the Nile. The 
French vessels were larger and more heavily armed, but the British 

were better trained and attacked enthusiastically. The most dramatic 


Orient), 

and the gunpowder magazine exploded, blowing the ship apart. By 

majority of the French ships were either captured or destroyed. This was an important victory for England. Without the support of 


he had to abandon most of his army in Egypt and sneak back to 
France alone. Although Napoleon might be dominant on land, as 

long as England controlled the sea, his dreams of world conquest 
would remain unrealized. The BattleBy the middle of 1805, the English blockade had been going on for years, and Napoleon was getting tired of waiting. By capturing 


large that it could overwhelm any English opposition. 

destroy the English ships in the channel, and give his army the 
chance it needed to cross. The admiral put in charge of this mission, 


174Lecture 25: 1805 Trafalgar—Nelson Thwarts Napoleon
including a number of particularly large battleships, including the 
biggest, most powerful ship in the world, the colossal four-deck, 

136-gun Santissima Trinidad
. On October 20, 1805, the combined 

Victory
. At a meeting of his captains, Nelson outlined a bold new strategy: 
Rather than using the line of battle, Nelson planned to form his 
ships into two shorter lines perpendicular to the French and charge 

straight at them, cutting the French line of battle in two places. His 
ships would then cluster around those of the enemy and attempt to 
overwhelm them. 

battle of the age, involving 60 ships of the line and 50,000 men. 



a message to his crews that has since become one of the most 

famous in military history: “England expects that every man will 

do his duty.”
The battle unfolded much as Nelson had intended, with the two 
as they approached. Nelson and the Victory
 led one of the English 
lines, and one of his trusted captains led the other. Both succeeded 


turned into a confused melee of ships blasting at each other at point 
blank range. As the battle raged, the Victory
 was surrounded by several enemy 
ships. Nelson was pacing back and forth on the deck when a musket 
ball shot from the mast of the French ship Redoubtable struck him 
in the shoulder, passed through his chest, and lodged in his spine. 

Nelson immediately realized the wound was fatal, and he died later 
that day. He lived long enough, however, to hear the news that his 


175Of the French and Spanish ships, all but 11 were captured or sunk. 

not a single vessel was lost, though many were heavily damaged, 
and there were 1,600 casualties. OutcomesTrafalgar was one of the keys to defeating Napoleon’s goal of 
universal domination. Although Napoleon’s power was as yet 

unchallenged on the continent, Trafalgar put an end to his plans 

to invade England. By ensuring England’s survival, the battle 

guaranteed that there would always be a strong European nation that 
could and would provide a focal point for opposition to Napoleon. After Trafalgar, Napoleon pulled his armies away from the English 
Channel and instead committed them, disastrously, to the invasion 

of Russia. Although it would still take much to defeat Napoleon, 

Trafalgar was the battle that checked his ascendency and marked 

the beginning of his decline. Adkins, Trafalgar: The Biography of a Battle
. Cannadine, Trafalgar in History
.Knight, The Pursuit of Victory
.Pocock, ed., Trafalgar: An Eyewitness History
. 1. 
Which of the many technological advancements mentioned in this lecture do you think most revolutionized naval warfare and why?2. 
How much credit for the victory at Trafalgar do you think was due to 

Nelson and how much to the general superiority of the English sailors in 
terms of training and experience?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider176Lecture 26: 1813 Leipzig—The Grand Coalition1813 Leipzig—The Grand CoalitionLecture 26What was the largest battle fought in Europe before the First World 
War? The answer is the Battle of Leipzig, which took place in 

1813 and involved more than half a million soldiers. It was a gigantic clash that included the armies from most of the leading nations of 
Europe at the time. More than any other battle of the era—even the much 
more famous Battle of Waterloo—Leipzig was the decisive moment when 


The Campaign
Trafalgar destroyed Napoleon’s hopes of invading England, he 

turned his attention to new conquests on the mainland, cleverly 
exploiting longstanding rivalries and resentments among his 
potential enemies to keep them from uniting against him. Eventually, Napoleon focused on Russia as a target, and in 1812, he 
led his army of more than half a million men into Russia. Although 

Napoleon won several battles and even managed to capture 
Moscow, his frozen and debilitated army was eventually forced 

to retreat, suffering severe hardships and more casualties. The 

campaign ended with the almost total annihilation of Napoleon’s 

army. 
Back in France, Napoleon rebuilt his army with astonishing speed. The battle-hardened survivors of the Russia campaign gave him a 

new soldiers, he had to draw on every possible source, even calling 
up several classes of young men ahead of schedule. By these means, 
he was apparently able to bounce back from the brink of disaster in 
a remarkably short time. 177On the surface, it looked as if Napoleon was now just as strong 
as ever, but there were several key underlying weaknesses in his 

new army. 

o First, the new conscripts truly represented the bottom of the manpower barrel—if Napoleon lost these men, there would be 
no replacing them. o Second, he had lost nearly 200,000 horses and most of his 



infantry recruits. Thus, when Napoleon’s new army went to 

war, it would be badly under strength in cavalry.
One of the most important roles of cavalry in Napoleonic warfare was to run down and wipe out a defeated enemy to ensure that it did 


for lack of adequate cavalry. 
Another consequence of Napoleon’s defeat in Russia was the loss of 
several powerful continental nations that, up to this time, had been 
his reluctant allies; these nations now felt safe to desert Napoleon 


these was Prussia.The Prussians signed an agreement with England, Russia, Spain, Portugal, and Sweden to work together in a joint effort to bring 

down Napoleon. This alliance was known as the Sixth Coalition—

its very name a testimony to how many times Napoleon had 
survived international attempts to unseat him. The great question remaining was which side Austria would join. 
The opposing alliances were so closely matched that whichever 
one could add Austria’s large army to its strength would have the 

advantage. Throughout the late spring and summer of 1813, the 

178Lecture 26: 1813 Leipzig—The Grand CoalitionRussia and Prussia moved aggressively, sending a combined army 
against Napoleon’s numerically superior force. In two battles, 

Napoleon defeated them, each time compelling the combined army 
to retreat, but partially because of his lack of cavalry, he was not 

able to destroy them or take the initiative himself. Thus, although 

these battles technically counted as victories, they also revealed 


Austria to side with the Sixth Coalition. In the late summer and early autumn of 1813, Napoleon sparred with coalition forces all across greater Germany. He won a clever 

victory at Dresden, but this was balanced out by the defeat of nearly 
all his marshals in other battles. Again, Napoleon’s ability to track 

the various coalition armies was severely hampered by his shortage 
of cavalry. Eventually, the remaining French forces, numbering 

about 185,000 soldiers, coalesced around Napoleon at Leipzig. Closing in on the city were four separate coalition armies, totaling approximately 330,000 men. The largest of these was a Russian-

Austrian force of about 150,000: the Army of Bohemia. The others 

were the predominantly Russian Army of Poland with about 50,000 

men, the Army of the North with 65,000, and the Army of Silesia 

with another 65,000. The BattleThe Battle of Leipzig lasted from October 16 to October 19, unfolding in a number of separate stages. On the morning of October 
16, Napoleon launched his main offensive, which he personally 

oversaw, against the Army of Bohemia to the south. Meanwhile, he 

ordered Marshal Marmont to conduct a holding action against the 
allied forces coming toward Leipzig from the north. 


seesawed over the course of the day, with ownership of the village 

changing hands no fewer than three times. 179In the early afternoon, after a particularly intense French barrage 
had weakened the Russian lines, Napoleon ordered Murat to 

charge at the head of 10,000 cavalry. The Russians managed to 

bring up reserves to blunt the attack, but as night began to fall, 

Napoleon’s forces had pushed deep into the enemy lines and 
 gained a considerable amount 

of territory. 
Although the Army of Bohemia 
was battered and driven back by 
Napoleon’s day-long assault, in 

the end, its lines did not break. 
Napoleon’s great offensive had 

failed and, along with it, his 
best chance to win the Battle  of Leipzig. Meanwhile, Marmont was desperately trying to stave 
off the attack of the Prussian 

General Blucher and his Army 

of Silesia in the north. Again, 

several of the villages outside 
Leipzig became focal points 
of the struggle, especially the 

hamlet of Mockern, which served as a French strongpoint. Finally, 

Marmont was wounded in a Prussian cavalry charge, and Blucher 

captured Mockern. On October 18, the coalition launched an all-out assault, with all the armies advancing on the encircled French. Their plan was simple: 

Attack until victory was achieved. In the afternoon, the tide began 
to turn against the French. As night fell, it was clear that the French 

had lost the battle. Napoleon himself was described as being in a 
depressed state, and inadequate preparations had been made for a 

retreat from Leipzig. The only remaining question was whether the 

French could escape the ring that was closing in around them. Napoleon probably should have retreated on October 17, but he 
was intent on securing the victory 
that he believed would lead to the 

thus, he stayed and drew in his 
forces tighter around Leipzig.© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock. 180Lecture 26: 1813 Leipzig—The Grand Coalition
taken a severe battering. His forces were defeated but not broken, 

and the regiments were still disciplined and in good order. If he 

could retreat from Leipzig with his remaining men and equipment 



army to challenge the Sixth Coalition and perhaps pull out another 

brilliant victory. 
Because the French were surrounded on three sides by the coalition forces, their only escape route was to the west, over causeways 


French forces streamed over this bridge to safety. 
At this moment, however, an incident transformed the battle 
from a discouraging but potentially survivable defeat into a fatal 

disaster. Napoleon had put one of his generals in charge of the 

Elster bridge with orders to blow it up after the French army 

had crossed. This general delegated responsibility to one of his 

colonels, who placed the explosives. Because this colonel was 

unsure which unit was the rearguard, he went to headquarters to 


When a few Russian skirmishers began shooting at the troops streaming across the bridge, the corporal panicked and lit the fuse. 
The explosion killed hundreds of French troops and trapped tens 
of thousands of French soldiers on the wrong side of the river, 

along with most of the wounded and a sizable portion of the French 
artillery. Ultimately, more than 40,000 prime troops were stranded 

and taken prisoner, along with 300 irreplaceable cannons. 
OutcomesThese losses doomed Napoleon. The allies had won a truly decisive 
victory and one from which the French could not recover. The shaky 

coalition now had a shared victory and could see a clear path to the 

end of the war. The coalition forces entered Paris on March 30, 1814. 
181Napoleon abdicated and went into exile on the island of Elba, but in February 1815, he escaped from the island, landed in France, 
proclaimed himself emperor, and began to rally his veterans, 

initiating the period known as the Hundred Days. Immediately, 

a Seventh Coalition was formed, and each of the major powers 
promised to supply 150,000 men to oppose Napoleon. 

Prussians under Blucher. Realizing that his only hope was to defeat 

his enemies before they could unite, Napoleon moved against them. 

The result was the Battle of Waterloo, at which Wellington and an 

army of about 80,000 narrowly defeated Napoleon and his 70,000. 
Waterloo is often cited as the decisive battle of the Napoleonic Wars, 

But it was Leipzig that taught Europe how to defeat Napoleon—the 
quick response of the Seventh Coalition demonstrated that Europe 
had learned that lesson well—thus, the outcome of the Hundred 
Days was never really in doubt. Defeated again, Napoleon was 
shipped off to the island of St. Helena and died there in 1821. 
Brett-James, Europe against Napoleon
.Hofschroer, 
Leipzig 1813.Maude, The Leipzig Campaign, 1813.1. 
Do you agree with the argument that Leipzig was more decisive than 
Waterloo? Why or why not?
2. 
Had the Elster bridge not been blown up prematurely, could this battle 

still be considered decisive?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider182Lecture 27: 1824 Ayacucho—South American Independence
1824 Ayacucho—South American Independence
Lecture 27I

orders to capture Cape Town in Dutch South Africa, decided to cross 

over to South America and capture the Spanish viceroyalty of the Rio 


resistance movements soon appeared. After a year of campaigns, the British 



learned two important facts: Spain was too weak to effectively defend 

them, and they could defeat European troops. When coupled with ideas of 

freedom and self-rule derived from the recent American, French, and Haitian 

revolutions, these insights would lead to the emergence of independence 

movements in South and Central America. 
The LiberatorsAmong the many leaders who played roles in the Latin American 
independence movements, Simon Bolivar is prominent for his 
involvement in the independence struggles of several regions. He 
grew up in Caracas, where his family represented the extreme upper 
class. By 1800, his family had already been in the New World for 

more than 250 years; they were aristocrats whose great wealth 
derived from, among other things, mines operated using slave labor. 
Bolivar attended a military academy, then went to Europe, where 


led the rather typically debauched life of a young, rich, aristocratic 
playboy, but he was also exposed to the ideas of the Enlightenment 

and experienced a political awakening. He began to apply the ideals 
of freedom and self-government that he was hearing and reading 
about to his home continent. When he returned to Venezuela in 1807, Bolivar brought a 
conviction that his homeland must achieve independence from 
Spain. Initially, not many agreed, and for some years, he suppressed 
183his radical inclinations. Revolution was inevitable, however, and he 
became involved in an early attempt to establish a Venezuelan state 

that became known as the First Republic. Bolivar’s performance 

was not impressive—he suffered a bad military defeat and betrayed 

one of the leaders of the movement to the Spanish. His next attempt was a new uprising accompanied by several 
again, success was short-lived, and after a counterrevolution, 
Bolivar departed for a period of exile in Haiti and Jamaica. Upon 
his return in 1816, the revolutionary movement began to gather 
greater momentum. An early turning point was the Battle of Boyaca in 1819, at which Bolivar’s forces defeated a royalist army, leading to the 

independence of the region occupied by modern Colombia. This 

was followed in 1821 by another important victory at the Battle 
of Carabobo, which enabled the creation of a Gran Colombia 
encompassing the northern quarter of South America. Bolivar 

himself became president of this new state. 
Antonio Jose de Sucre; in 1822, he led an army into Ecuador. After a 

dramatic battle on the slopes of a volcano, Sucre was victorious and 
soon after captured Quito. As a result of Sucre’s actions, Ecuador 

now joined the list of independent South American countries. 
Meanwhile, revolutionary movements were breaking out across 
was Jose de San Martin. Although he was born in the New World, 

his family moved to Spain when San Martin was just a child. His 
father was a soldier, and San Martin followed him into the army, 


San Martin resigned his commission and returned to South America, where he became involved in the war for Argentine 

independence. He began to rise to prominence after he organized 
184Lecture 27: 1824 Ayacucho—South American Independence
a unit called the Army of the 
Andes and, with it, crossed 
the supposedly impassable 
mountains and invaded Chile. 
After a series of battles, 
Chilean independence was 
achieved in 1818, winning San 
Martin considerable renown. 
Having helped Argentina 

and Chile gain freedom, San 
Martin now focused his efforts 

on attempting to extend the 
liberation movement to Peru. The two great liberators of 
the north and the south met at 
Guayaquil in July 1822 to plan 
a joint assault against Peru, 
but they clashed in terms of 
personality, preferred methods 

of operation, and, most 

them would be nearly impossible and fearing that even to attempt 
it might destroy what they had accomplished, the aging San Martin 
decided to remove himself from the scene. He retired permanently 
to Europe, where he died in 1850, leaving Bolivar effectively in 

charge of the South American revolutionary movement.
The BattleBy 1824, with Columbia, Venezuela, Argentina, Ecuador, and Chile 
liberated, the primary bastion of colonial Spanish rule in South 
America was Peru. The conquest of Peru would not be easy because 

it still contained a strong army of 12,000 royalist troops loyal to the 
Spanish king, and the highland area of the country was a natural 

fortress surrounded by the Andes. 
Albion Legion, played a key role 
in the battle for South American 

independence; Bolivar himself 
once attributed at least part of his 
success to the recruiting agent in 
London.© Sourabh Jain/iStock/Thinkstock.185Bolivar and his chief lieutenant, Sucre, began to plan their campaign against Peru. The time was ripe for an attack: Internal turmoil in 

Spain ensured that the royalist forces in South America would not 

be receiving reinforcements. In May 1824, the revolutionary army embarked on an epic march through the mountains. The soldiers suffered severely from altitude 

sickness and from nighttime temperatures well below freezing. By 
August, Bolivar had made his way onto the high Peruvian plateau 
with an army of nearly 9,000 men. On August 6, there was a sharp clash between Bolivar’s cavalry 
and that of the royalists at Lake Junin, at an altitude of 12,000 feet. 

The royalist cavalry initially had success, but Bolivar’s horsemen 

rallied and drove them off. From a military perspective, this battle 

was unusual because it was fought solely by the mounted forces 
using only swords and lances. Although a relatively minor victory, 

the Battle of Junin greatly elevated the morale of the revolutionary 
army, and it cleared the way for Bolivar to march into Peru proper, 

setting the stage for the decisive Battle of Ayacucho. 
Bolivar departed to deal with some urgent political issues, leaving 
Sucre in charge of the army. The commander of the royalist army 

opposing Sucre was Jose de la Serna. For several months, Sucre 
and La Serna shadowed each other. Finally, the two forces drew 

together on December 8 near the plain of Ayacucho and encamped 

for the night. That evening, Sucre cleverly ordered his musicians forward toward 
the Spanish, together with some skirmishers. Throughout the night, 




awake, ensuring that they would be ill-rested for the coming battle. 

only 1,300 by 800 yards. Sucre’s army of about 6,000 men and one 
186Lecture 27: 1824 Ayacucho—South American Independence
cannon deployed along the western edge. He arranged his infantry battalions in a line, with his cavalry behind them as a reserve.On the eastern edge, La Serna deployed his approximately 7,000 men and seven cannons into a similar line of infantry, with some 

cavalry on each side. As a reserve, he had a large group of cavalry 

and an elite battalion of halberdiers. He planned to attack and pin 

center to move in and crush the liberators. 
having some success. The rest of the Spanish line also advanced, 



spread across the length of the lines. The heavier artillery of the 

royalists gave their attack extra momentum, but Sucre countered 



line and fought them off. 
By afternoon, the battle was turning in favor of the liberators, and the remaining organized royalist forces were falling back into a last-

ditch defensive stand on the high ground. La Serna was wounded, 
and soon after, he and his remaining men surrendered to Sucre. 
OutcomesWith the victory at Ayacucho, the last Spanish resistance crumbled. 
Ayacucho can be considered a decisive battle in global history 

because it was the event that clearly ended Spanish rule in Latin 
America, and it secured and ensured the continued existence of the 
newly independent South American nations.
Within a year of Ayacucho, all the territories in the New World 
had thrown off their colonial overseers and created independent 

nations. Spain, which had once controlled the greater part of two 
vast continents, had its New World possessions reduced to Cuba 

and Puerto Rico. The loss of these territories and of the incomes 
187that came with them caused Spain to plummet from international power and importance. 
United States was quick to give diplomatic recognition to the newly 
formed states and issued the Monroe Doctrine, which declared that 
any attempt by European powers to reestablish colonial rule in the 
hemisphere would be considered a hostile act.Chasteen, Americanos.Davis, 100 Decisive Battles from Ancient Times to the Present
. Lynch, 
Simón Bolívar.1. 
What do you think were the strengths and weaknesses of Bolivar as a commander, and how did these affect the outcome of history?
2. 
Do you think the independence of the South American countries 

was inevitable, and how might history have been different if the 

independence movements had been delayed even by half a century?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider188

Lecture 28The Battle of San Jacinto lasted only 18 minutes and involved barely more than 2,000 men on both sides. Compared to many famous 
battles of history, it would hardly qualify as a minor skirmish, yet the 
long-term effects of this little clash along the banks of the San Jacinto River 



land larger than the mainland of Western Europe. Even more so than usual, 

the course of the campaign leading up this battle, as well as its outcome, 
hinged on the personalities of the opposing commanders, Sam Houston and 
Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna. 
The Opponents
frontier whose biography seems too improbable to be true. He was 
born in Virginia, but his family moved to Tennessee. As a boy, 

he combined an enthusiasm for adventuring in the woods with 
adoration of the epics of Homer and Virgil. Despite this love of 

classical literature, he was a rebellious and indifferent student. 
Enrolling in the U.S. army, he served in the war against the Creek 
Indians under Andrew Jackson, where his accomplishments 

included gaining fame for his bravery, attaining the rank of 

lieutenant, becoming Jackson’s protégé, and putting down a mutiny 

by aiming a cannon at his own men. After stints as an Indian agent and a lawyer, Houston embarked 
on a political career. With Jackson’s patronage, he was highly 



governor of Tennessee, during which time he shot a man in a duel. 
In 1832, at the age of 39, Houston moved to Texas, gained Mexican 
citizenship, and became enamored of the region. He soon fell in 189with the faction agitating for Texan independence and assumed a 
leadership role among them. The commander of the Mexican army at San Jacinto was Antonio 
Lopez de Santa Anna, a fascinating character who dominated nearly 


bored, capable of manic energy but prone to wallowing in self-

indulgence, Santa Anna was obviously a complex individual and 

continues to be controversial today. 
In 1810, at the age of 16, he enrolled as a cadet in the army. Two 
months after his enlistment, the Mexican War of Independence 



Indians, insurgents, and royalists and rising to the rank of colonel. 

He was wounded at least once and cited for bravery and elevated to 
the rank of general. Perhaps his moment of greatest popularity came when Spain made a rather feeble attempt to retake Mexico in 1829, and Santa Anna 

led the Mexican army in defeating the invading force at the Battle 



permanent Mexican independence from Spain, but Santa Anna 

reveled excessively in honors resulting from his success. 



next three years, he was in and out of the presidency three times, 

eventually dissolving the government and declaring himself dictator. 
The CampaignNew Spain encompassed not only modern Mexico, but it also 
coastline, including all of California. When Mexico gained 

independence from Spain in the early 1800s, it inherited this vast, 
sparsely populated region. 190
A section roughly equivalent to modern Texas and the state of 
Coahuila in Mexico was administratively organized into a region 

known as the province of Coahuila and Texas. The Mexican 

government was eager to increase population in this province and, 
thus, encouraged immigrants from the United States to settle there, 

even granting them Mexican citizenship. This policy proved so 

successful that 20,000 new American immigrants soon poured into 

the province, heavily outnumbering the Mexicans settled there. In October 1832, the Texan leaders met in a convention and 
drafted a series of demands to be sent to the Mexican government. 
The main ones were that the law closing the border to American 

immigration should be repealed and that the status of Texas within 

Mexico should be upgraded to full statehood. Stephen Austin was dispatched to Mexico City to carry the 
convention’s demands to the Mexican government. By now, Santa 

Anna was trying to consolidate his dictatorship and suppress revolts 
against his seizure of power. Austin was accused of treason and 

thrown into prison. Released three years later in 1835, the former 


Texans’ only option. 
These feelings were strengthened when it was announced that Santa 
Anna planned to personally lead a military force into Texas to 

punish any rebels. Up to this point, Houston had not played much of 
a role in politics in Texas, but the threat from Mexico prompted him 



the commander of this force. The next phase of the campaign is well-known. Santa Anna marched 
an army of about 6,000 men into Texas, toward San Antonio. 

Rather than withdrawing—as they probably should have done—
the local commanders, William Travis and Jim Bowie, decided to 

stay and oppose the Mexicans, basing their forces in a decrepit 
Spanish mission called the Alamo. There, a group of around 180 
191men managed to resist Santa Anna’s attacks for nearly two weeks 
before the garrison was overrun and slaughtered. Now, the only remaining opposition to Santa Anna in Texas was 
Sam Houston and his army of volunteers, numbering around 300. 
Over the next month, Houston and his men repeatedly retreated, 
abandoning position after position, as Santa Anna pursued them 

across Texas. They marched more than 200 miles backward during 

this period, and Houston turned down a number of opportunities to 
engage Santa Anna in battle. 
But Houston may have been following a deliberate strategy the whole time. The further Houston went, the longer Santa Anna’s 

lines of communication stretched and the more troops Santa Anna 

had to detach from his army to garrison key points along the 
way. Also, the longer Houston delayed, the more time he had to 



volunteers showed up to join the Texan army. 
The BattleWhen Houston reached Lynchburg, he apparently decided that the 
time was right to stop and face Santa Anna. He encamped his army 

in a line of woods along the shores of Buffalo Bayou. This bayou 

ran into the San Jacinto River, and the two waterways formed a 

horseshoe shape enclosing a small plain covered in high grass. The 

Texans settled down in the tree line on one side to await the arrival of 

the Mexicans. It has been calculated that Houston’s army numbered 

930 men, although Houston believed he had only around 780. 

Depleted by disease, marching, and the need to leave men in 
garrisons, the Mexican army was down to around 950 men and one 
large cannon, either a 9- or 12-pounder. Santa Anna ordered this 


with his cannons; thus, the opening stage of the battle took the form 
of an artillery duel. 192
Houston held a council of war that evening, deciding to wait for 
organizing his men and making sure that the sentries were alert 

against a possible surprise nocturnal assault by the Texans. He had 

sent orders to his brother-in-law, General Cos, to meet him and to 

bring along 500 elite soldiers to reinforce his army, and he did not 

want to engage until these troops arrived.To Santa Anna’s displeasure, however, Cos brought with him about 
400 new recruits, rather than the highly trained, experienced men 

ordered the exhausted men to get some food, then take a nap. Tired 

from being up all night himself, Santa Anna lay down beneath a 

tree, having given orders that a strict watch be maintained on the 
Texans and that he himself should be awakened at any sign of 

movement. Unfortunately, these orders either were not carried out, 

or the designated sentries failed to perform their duties. The Texans grew increasingly restless, and by midafternoon, 
their frustration reached the boiling point. Houston ordered his 
men to deploy for battle and took his position at their head. The 

Texans trotted quickly forward through the tall grass in a long line, 

dragging the cannon on leather straps. First to reach the Mexican 

and were soon joined by the cannon and the rest of the line. The 


their cannon. The Texas line swept over the low defensive wall erected by the 
Mexicans and spread through the camp. Caught totally by surprise, 


attempted to rally his men, but realizing it was hopeless, he mounted 


193OutcomesSanta Anna was caught and, in exchange for his freedom, signed 
two treaties in which he promised to withdraw his troops and work 

for Texan independence. Texas spent nine years as an independent 

nation, then joined the United States in 1845. Ongoing disagreement 

over where the Texas border was located then sparked the Mexican-

American War, which ended with the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. 

Mexico agreed to cede to the United States a further chunk of territory 

that included modern California, Utah, Nevada, and New Mexico.Bitter debates in Congress over whether such new states as Texas 
and those formed out of the territory gained from Mexico should be 
slave-owning or not became one of the main issues leading to the 
secession of the southern states and the American Civil War. 
Fowler, 
Santa Anna of Mexico
. Haley, 
Sam Houston. Moore, Eighteen Minutes.1.Do you agree with Houston’s strategy to keep retreating, or should he 
have fought Santa Ana earlier?
2. 
From a Mexican perspective, do you think that Santa Ana was ultimately 

more of a positive or a negative force?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider194

Lecture 29It could be argued that September 4, 1862, represents the high point of 
the Confederacy and its attempt to secede from the United States. Over 

the previous months, southern armies had thwarted the Union’s efforts to 
capture Richmond. Then, at the Second Battle of Bull Run, Stonewall Jackson 


D.C. Riding this wave of victories, the morale of the southern soldiers was at 


was on the verge of achieving independence from the rest of the Union. 

Accordingly, on September 4, Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia crossed into 

Backdrop to Antietam 
After the Second Battle of Bull Run, the route to Washington for 
Confederate forces now lay open, but Robert E. Lee knew that 
he did not have the strength to directly assault the defenses of 
the northern capital. He devised a plan to bypass Washington and 



Confederacy had invaded the north, and it represented a shift from 
defense to offense. 
Lincoln faced midterm elections in November, and a successful 
Confederate campaign in Maryland might discredit him and 
embolden antiwar northerners into pressuring him to seek peace. 
Furthermore, Maryland was believed to harbor many southern 
sympathizers, and Lee hoped that the presence of his army there 
might provoke the state into switching its allegiance, perhaps even 
triggering other border states to abandon the Union. At the same time, major European powers were actively considering granting political recognition to the Confederacy, which would 

establish the legitimacy of the Confederacy and likely result in vital 
material aid. Thus, the march into Maryland on September 4 by 
195
Civil War.
The OpponentsLee embodied the stereotype of the southern gentleman. He came from one of the most aristocratic families in Virginia. His father had 

been a renowned commander during the Revolution, was a friend of 
George Washington, and had served as governor of Virginia. At the 

outbreak of the Civil War, Lee’s strong allegiance to his home state 

caused him to decline a high position in the Union army and instead 
offer his services to the Confederacy. 
After General Joseph Johnston was wounded on June 1, 1862, 
Lee was appointed commander of the Army of Northern Virginia, 

operating in the corridor between Washington and Richmond. One 



in his troops, which enabled him to demand much of them even 

under conditions of severe hardship. He had a talent for using bold 

troop movements to outmaneuver and often defeat numerically 

superior opponents. 
Lee’s undoubted abilities as a general were sometimes undermined 
by a failure to consider the overall strategic picture; as the war 

progressed, he clung far too long to a reliance on crude frontal attacks 

that, even if successful, were wasteful of his limited manpower.
Lee’s opponent at the Battle of Antietam was George McClellan, 
whose early career had a number of similarities with Lee’s. 

McClellan was born into an old, respected Pennsylvania family and 
attended West Point, where he was a serious and studious cadet. He 

specialized in engineering and had served with distinction in the 
Mexican-American War. 
After the shocking northern defeat at the First Battle of Bull Run, McClellan was summoned to Washington and placed in command 

of the forces defending the capital. Here, McClellan displayed what 
would be his greatest talents as a general: training and logistics. He 196
vigorously reorganized the army, enforced modern drill, and greatly 
improved both its discipline and morale. Like Lee, he was popular with the soldiers, who appreciated 
his constant and energetic efforts to improve their conditions. 

He also applied his industry to erecting a powerful network of 


made that the Confederates would never make a serious effort to 

break through them. 
Yet McClellan suffered substantial weaknesses as a general: He 
persisted in vastly overestimating the numbers of his foes, which led 
him to be overly cautious and slow to attack. He repeatedly failed to 



his troops in reserve when they would have been better employed in 

attacking the enemy. 

when his successor was thrashed at the Second Battle of Bull Run, 
Lincoln turned to McClellan to rebuild the broken army. Thus, 

when Lee followed up the victory at Second Bull Run with his 
invasion of Maryland, it fell to McClellan to oppose him. The BattleAt the outset, McClellan fell into a rare opportunity. Lee had written 
up his plans for the campaign, including detailed instructions and 
timetables for the movements of each segment of his army—four 
groups that would converge on a Union garrison at Harpers Ferry—

in a document labeled “Special Order 191.” Copies of the order 
were sent to each of his principal commanders, but one was found 
lying on the ground by a group of Union soldiers and quickly made 
its way up the chain of command to McClellan.The value of this intelligence was undermined by McClellan’s 
habitual caution. He squandered his opportunity by deploying 
his army too sluggishly to catch the elements of Lee’s army and 

destroy them, with the result that Harpers Ferry fell to Stonewall 197Jackson, and Lee was able to consolidate most of his 
scattered army near the town 
of Sharpsburg. He drew up 

his forces in a defensive line 
and prepared to give battle. McClellan devised a complicated plan of 
attack that required close 
cooperation and timing 
among the various units in 
order to maintain continuous 
pressure, but his orders were 


apprise commanders of the 
larger picture, so that units 

acted independently instead 
of in concert. The battle began at dawn on September 17, with elements 
of the Union right moving forward against the Confederate left, 





bloodbath that shocked even the veterans. The momentum of the battle shifted to the center, where the 
southerners’ defenses were anchored by a road that formed a natural 



Union regiments. 
o Lee skillfully fed his limited reserves into the fray at just the right moments to save his formations from collapse. When 

these were used up, he daringly weakened parts of his line to 
rush troops to the threatened segments. It is estimated that possession of the 

switched hands 15 times, and the 
area became a meat grinder within 
which entire regiments could be 
obliterated in an instant. © Kurt Holter/iStock/Thinkstock.198
o The Union assaults were just uncoordinated and sporadic enough to enable Lee to play this dangerous game successfully, 



attack after another. 
Around the road, nearly 6,000 men lay dead or wounded, and the 
Confederate forces were severely depleted. The formations were 

shattered, and the defense was reduced to clusters of men still 

clinging stubbornly to bits of ground. Not only were the Confederates 

running low on men, but ammunition was scarce, as well. 
McClellan had a body of 14,000 men waiting less than a mile from the road who easily could have been ordered forward to exploit the 
vulnerable Confederate center. As always, however, he was fearful 

of imaginary Confederate legions and instead gave orders to the 
generals commanding his reserves to hold their positions.Nevertheless, by early afternoon, the irresistible pressure of the Union attacks had pushed the Confederates back from their initial 
positions in the north and the center. Although forced to give 

ground, the southern lines had not broken, and the failure to commit 

to lose momentum. The focal point of the battle now shifted to the 

Union left. The Union commander in this sector was General Ambrose 
Burnside. His 12,000 men were positioned on one side of a steep-
banked stream spanned by a stone bridge. The Confederate units 

facing him were well-situated on high ground overlooking the 


and other obstacles. By midafternoon, Burnside had crossed the 
narrow bridge and was pursuing the Confederates.Lee had nothing left to counter this fresh tide of attackers, and the battle was once again on the verge of a Union victory. But at this 

crucial moment, the last remaining major division of Lee’s army 


199

moved forward against Lee’s main line. 
Despite their numerical advantage on the left, it was the Union forces who gave ground and retreated to their initial positions. 


Lee’s army from destruction. 
The battle of Antietam was the single bloodiest day in the entire 
Civil War. Stunned by the carnage, the next day, the two armies 

did nothing, and that night, Lee began withdrawing his forces back 
toward Virginia. Despite his substantial numerical superiority, his 

unused reserves, and yet another contingent of 14,000 fresh troops, 
McClellan let Lee go unmolested. OutcomesWho won the Battle of Antietam? In tactical terms, Lee certainly 
outmaneuvered McClellan, but in the end, Lee was the one who had 


importance of the battle emerges as perhaps the decisive turning 

point of the war.
Antietam broke the South’s string of victories and gave the 

Lincoln’s position and ensured his party’s control of Congress, thus 

guaranteeing the continued vigorous prosecution of the war. It also 



Confederacy, which on its own may have doomed the southern cause. 
Finally, Antietam provided the victory that Lincoln had been 
waiting for to issue the Emancipation Proclamation. Although 

mainly symbolic, this act fundamentally transformed the nature 
of the war from a struggle about states’ rights or economics into a 

moral crusade being fought for the very soul of the nation. 200
Frassanito, Antietam.McPherson, Crossroads of Freedom
.Sears, Landscape Turned Red
.1. 
Ultimately, how much effect do you think the “lost orders” had on the 
broader course of history?2. 
Do you think Lee could have won the Battle of Antietam, or was a draw 

the best he could hope for under the circumstances?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider2011866 Königgrätz—Bismarck Molds GermanyLecture 30In the mid-19th century, Otto von Bismarck of Prussia sought to unite 
under Prussian leadership the dozens of disparate German-speaking 
principalities and kingdoms into one Germany, which would then become 
the dominant force in European politics. Bismarck believed that his goals 


power would have to be accomplished through military force. Although in 



key moment early in the process catapulted both Bismarck and Prussia into 
prominence: the Battle of Königgrätz, fought against Austria in 1866. Today, 

this battle is viewed as a crushing Prussian victory and the foundation block 

The OpponentsOver the course of 30 years, 

and then as chancellor of 
Germany, Otto von Bismarck 

skillfully pursued the goals 


Prussian ascendancy. Although 

a brilliant politician, he 
needed a soldier to carry out 
his aggressive policies, and in 
Helmuth von Moltke, he found 
a partner as skilled at warfare 
as he was at politics.Moltke was an organizational 
genius and a brilliant military 

theorist who oversaw the 

development of the Prussian 

army into the most formidable 
Some have argued that World 
Wars I and II were consequences 



Germany; thus, in achieving his 
dreams, Bismarck may have 
created a nightmare for others.© lbusca/iStock/Thinkstock.202Lecture 30: 1866 Königgrätz—Bismarck Molds Germanyforce on the continent. He rose quickly through the ranks, becoming 
chief of the Prussian General Staff. It was from this position that he 

was able to put into effect his theories on warfare.
As a strategist, Moltke managed to combine a gift for meticulous planning and ferocious organization with a pragmatic appreciation 


o 
o 


costly and outdated. o He was ahead of his time in appreciating the value of a well-trained general staff and was a proponent of new technologies, 

making extensive use of railroads to mobilize his troops during 
the war with Austria and of the telegraph to coordinate the 

movements of widely dispersed armies. Moltke was not able to fully modernize Prussia’s artillery, but he 
was successful in organizing and equipping its infantry along state-

of-the-art principles, particularly the basic gun carried by the men. 
Whereas their Austrian opponents were still using muzzle-loading 

muskets, Prussian infantry were issued modern bolt-action, breech-

o Although the breech-loader offered a number of advantages, 



o By the mid-19th century, some arms manufacturers were solving 
that problem. One version used a sharp, needlelike spike to 


mechanism, it was often popularly called a needle gun. This 

gun was selected by the Prussian army for mass production and 
issuance to its troops. 203During this period, the two most powerful states on the continent were France and the Austrian Empire. A united Germany would 

challenge their hegemony; thus, any attempt to create a powerful 

in particular, exercised varying degrees of control over several of 

the key Germanic states and regions that Bismarck wished to bring 
The Austrian Empire was a large, wealthy, culturally fragmented 
realm that included parts of northern Italy, Hungary, Croatia, the 

Illyrian coast, Bohemia, and Transylvania. The Austrian army, 


fought with success in a number of minor wars. Commanding the Austrian forces at Königgrätz was Ludwig 
von Benedek, the son of a Hungarian doctor. Like Moltke, he 

determined upon a military career early in life and enrolled as a 
cadet in a military academy at the age of 14. He was both a highly 

mostly in Italy, and gaining a reputation for bravery. At the Battle 


command alone stood its ground and nearly snatched victory from 
disaster, further enhancing his reputation. 
When war with Prussia became imminent, Benedek was the popular choice for overall command of Austria’s armies, but he 

was reluctant to accept, recognizing that grand strategic thinking 
was not his strength. Among other factors, he had spent his entire 


basic topography of Central Europe. Nevertheless, he accepted the 

between the slapdash, rather disinterested General Army Staff of 


could not have been more pronounced. 204Lecture 30: 1866 Königgrätz—Bismarck Molds GermanyThe Campaign and BattleBismarck and the Prussians knew that to supplant the Austrian 
Empire in its dominant position over the German confederation, 
they would have to provoke a war. The opportunity came when 


On June 15, 1866, the Prussians demanded that the states of Hannover, Hesse-Kassel, and Saxony abandon their alliances with 


Now, Moltke’s careful planning paid dividends, as Prussian armies 

rapidly mobilized and swept forward, and the three states were 
conquered with astonishing swiftness. 

for invading the Austrian Empire. Moltke had devised a four-

pronged attack, in which the separate armies would conquer initial 
objectives, mostly the minor German states, then combine to take 
on the main Austrian army. 
Critics of Moltke’s plan feared that dispersing the elements of the 
Prussian army so widely would make them vulnerable to attack, but 
the speed of their advance kept the Austrians off balance, and the 

invasion accomplished all of its initial objectives. Meanwhile, Benedek situated the main Austrian army in an arc 
with its back to the Elbe River northeast of Königgrätz in southern 
Bohemia. This Austrian army was as large as all the Prussian ones 

combined, numbering around 250,000 men. By dawn on the morning of July 3, the Prussian Elbe and First Armies were closing in on the Austrian army from the east and 

were ready to launch an attack. The Second Army, however, was 

still marching down from the north. Without it, the Elbe and First 

Armies were outnumbered almost two to one. Moltke had to decide 
whether or not to launch the attack with the available forces and 
hope that the Second Army would arrive to strike the Austrians’ 

205
bridge but encountered determined resistance. In the center and on 
the left, the Prussian First Army waded across a river and pressed 

its attack, initially meeting with success and driving back the 
opposing forces. The needle gun proved its superiority and helped 

the Prussians to defeat larger contingents of Austrians. 
The Prussians advanced through a series of small villages before entering a zone commanded by the massed Austrian artillery. The 




On the Prussian left, many men sought refuge from the deadly cannonade in the Svir forest, which became the scene of an 

the advance and threatened to break the Prussian lines. At least 13 



verge of buckling. The desperate Prussian commander appealed 

for reinforcements, but Moltke refused, calculating that until the 
Second Army arrived, all reserves had to be kept intact to meet the 

potential threat of a general Austrian advance. 
One Austrian commander pushed his men forward on the far left 

needed was for Benedek to support this action with a push against 
the Prussian center. This was a crisis point in the battle and the 

moment of supreme danger for the Prussians. Benedek, however, 

chose to remain on the defensive, refusing all requests to advance 
and, instead, letting his cannons chew up the Prussian forces. Moltke, aware of the danger, knew that all he could do was watch 
for the Second Army. At last, it appeared and began to drive into 




Austrians. Caught in a classic double envelopment, the Austrian 

army began to crumble. 206Lecture 30: 1866 Königgrätz—Bismarck Molds GermanyAlthough some of the Prussian generals wanted to pursue and completely destroy the Austrian army, Bismarck astutely realized 

that, in the long run, it would be more useful to reconcile with 
Austria rather than to have her as a bitter enemy; thus, he persuaded 
Moltke to call off the pursuit. 
OutcomesAfter the battle, the Austrian Emperor Franz Josef immediately 

six months, was reorganized as the Austro-Hungarian Empire. 

humiliating defeat on the French. As part of the peace treaty, France 

was forced to cede Alsace-Lorraine and pay a huge indemnity—

actions that created great resentment and were factors leading to the 
outbreak of the First World War. 
The only European nation more powerful than a united Germany was Great Britain, and the two countries engaged in an arms race 
that was yet another element leading to World War I. It is not 


half of the 20th century can be traced directly to Prussia’s triumph 
at Königgrätz, but it should not be forgotten how easily the battle 

might have had a different outcome.
Craig, The Battle of Königgrätz.Steinberg, 
Bismarck
.Wawro, 
The Austro-Prussian War
.Suggested Reading2071. 
Moltke?2. 
What were the pivotal factors that determined the outcome of the Battle 
of Königgrätz?Questions to Consider208Lecture 31: 1905 Tsushima—Japan Humiliates Russia
1905 Tsushima—Japan Humiliates Russia
Lecture 31O

Uraga, Japan, witnessed a disturbing sight: Four foreign warships 
boldly steamed into the bay and anchored just offshore; they were 
commanded by Commodore Matthew Perry, an American naval hero. For 

the previous 250 years, Japan had pursued a strict isolationist policy, closing 

its borders to almost all contact with foreigners and refusing even to meet 
with representatives of other nations. This policy had resulted in Japan 

missing the Industrial Revolution. At least 18 attempts by various countries 

had sought to establish economic or diplomatic ties with Japan, but every 
one of them had been rebuffed. Perry was determined to succeed where 

others had failed.Japan’s Military Modernization 
In July of 1853, through a combination of blunt force, bullying, and stubbornness, Commodore Matthew Perry, a U.S. naval hero, 

managed to make contact with representatives of the Japanese 
government, penetrating a strict isolationist policy that had been in 

place for the previous 250 years. On a follow-up visit the next year, 

he negotiated the Treaty of Kanagawa, which opened Japanese 

ports to American trade. 
Much of Perry’s success was due to Japan’s lack of a real navy. This 
military inadequacy was intensely humiliating for the Japanese, and 
it was one of the main factors that sparked the Meiji Restoration. 
The new leadership adopted an astonishingly aggressive policy of 
modernization and industrialization. The Japanese decided to mold their new army and navy on the best 
o Great Britain had the reputation of having the largest, 


advanced navy in the world. Accordingly, Japanese naval 
209
and practices of the Royal Navy, and contracts were signed for 

new Japanese warships to be constructed in British shipyards 
following the most up-to-date designs. o The modern Japanese army was initially to be based on the French model, but after Prussia’s impressive defeats of Austria 

in 1866 and France in 1870, the Japanese switched to the 
Prussian military, again dispatching observers and purchasing 

Nevertheless, Japan continued to be viewed as a strange but unthreatening and technologically backward nation. This 

assumption would be blown to bits in the narrow gap of water 
separating Japan from Korea, the Tsushima Strait. It was here that, 



a much larger Russian one, announcing Japan’s entrance onto the 

global stage as a major power. 
The Navies and Their Technology

6 modern battleships, all built in Great Britain within the previous 

Mikasa, a 15,200-ton battleship completed in 1902. It represented the state of the art, having 12-
inch main guns that could be reloaded in whichever direction the 
Next in size and strength were 8 powerful armored cruisers, also recently built in foreign shipyards and all well-armed with 8- and 

supported by several dozen smaller cruisers and destroyers, as well 
as some squadrons of torpedo boats. The Japanese sailors were highly disciplined and dedicated. Because they had been subjected to vigorous training and drills, they knew 
their roles and had experience using their ships and weapons. 210Lecture 31: 1905 Tsushima—Japan Humiliates Russia


a young man, he witnessed an incident in which a British warship 
was able to shell Japan with impunity because of its lack of an 

effective navy, causing him to pursue a naval career. Accordingly, 

he was sent to England as a cadet in the British navy. After seven 

years, he returned to Japan, serving aboard a variety of warships 
and participating in several minor sea battles. In 1895, he attained 
the rank of admiral. 
Squadron, which had the most modern battleships; the Black Sea 
Squadron, trapped in that body of water by Turkish control of the 



near Japan at Port Arthur, consisted of 7 battleships, 7 cruisers, and 

a smattering of smaller craft. Although some of the vessels were 

reasonably modern, others were outdated, and the crews were 
generally ill-trained. The armament of the Japanese ship Mikasa included four 12-inch cannons in two rotating turrets, as well as a large secondary armament of 6-inch guns. © Monado/Wikimedia Commons/CC BY-SA 3.0.
211
The CampaignTsar Nicholas II of Russia had determined to focus his expansion 
efforts in the east and began to commit more troops and ships 

to increasing Russian power there. The obvious targets were 

Manchuria and the Korean peninsula. But Japan, whose imperial 
ambitions were growing along with its modernized military, also 

coveted these two regions. On February 4, 1904, Japan severed 


torpedo attack against the Russian ships anchored at Port Arthur. 



and an equally powerful boost to Japanese morale. The tsar 

dispatched the most renowned admiral in Russia, Stepan Makarov, to 

Port Arthur to take control of the situation and restore Russian pride. 



and sank within minutes, carrying Makarov and 662 members of its 
crew to the bottom. Togo now had the upper hand. The Japanese launched a massive 
invasion, ferrying hundreds of thousands of troops to Manchuria, 
defeating Russian armies at the battles of the Yalu River and 

Nanshan, capturing the port of Dalny, and surrounding Port Arthur. 
The tsar, determined to make a maximum effort to win the war, sent 


4 new battleships, 3 older battleships, and an attendant swarm of 
cruisers, destroyers, and support ships. 

also fair-minded and relatively concerned for the welfare of his 

men. Rozhestvensky spent two years as a naval attaché in Great 212Lecture 31: 1905 Tsushima—Japan Humiliates Russia

and technology of the Royal Navy. 
Just getting his ships to the battle zone posed an enormous logistical challenge. The vessels were coal-powered, and there were not many 

friendly refueling stations along the route. The Hamburg–America 

steamship line was contracted to position supply ships bearing 
340,000 tons of coal at intervals along the route. On October 15, 


an epic journey. 
Meanwhile, Port Arthur was being menaced by advancing Japanese 

port of Vladivostok. The remaining battleships and cruisers were 

intercepted by Togo. In the Battle of the Yellow Sea, the more 



neutral ports, where they were interned for the remainder of the war. 





of hopelessly outdated ironclads and slow coastal defense vessels. 
Rozhestvensky realized that these ships would add nothing to the 

not to burden him with them, but he was nevertheless ordered to 
wait for their arrival before proceeding to Vladivostok. 
The Battle

the presence of many ships of questionable value, Rozhestvensky 
still had a solid core of 7 modern battleships to Togo’s 4 and the 

advantage of more 10- and 12-inch cannons—41 to Togo’s 17. 



speed, morale, and 8-inch guns. 213
Tsushima Strait and radioed its position and course. Togo moved 




turn within range of the Russian guns, exposing each ship to 

unable to take advantage of the opportunity, and the maneuver was 

pulled off without serious damage. 


close range. Within 20 minutes, the well-directed gunnery of the 

Japanese began to take its toll, including the loss of Russia’s newest 

battleship and the severe wounding of Rozhestvensky. 
With the Russians leaderless and having lost their best ships, the 


the night, with the Japanese hunting down the remaining groups of 
Russian ships. With the destruction of its navy, Russia had to ask 

for peace talks. Japan gained Port Arthur and Sakhalin Island and 

was effectively free to do whatever it wanted in Korea. 
OutcomesIn Russia, the disasters of the Russo-Japanese War led to the 
uprisings of 1905. Although temporarily suppressed, these social 


Russian Revolution. The degree of success Japan experienced had the long-term result of encouraging and strengthening the militaristic and imperialistic 
elements within Japan. This would lead to continued expansionist 

policies and territorial aggression in the early 20th century, 
culminating in another invasion of Manchuria during the 1930s. With Russia removed from the equation, the only navy that could 

214Lecture 31: 1905 Tsushima—Japan Humiliates Russia
the rivalry between the two nations steadily increased until they 
Thus, the Battle of Tsushima can be said to have directly contributed 
to both the fall of tsarist Russia and the rise of a militaristic Japan 
whose expansionist policies contributed to the global cataclysm of 
World War II. 
Corbett, Maritime Operations in the Russo-Japanese War, 1904–1905.
Jukes, The Russo-Japanese War
. Pleshakov, 
The Tsar’s Last Armada
.1. 
What important technological advances in naval warfare are illustrated by the Battle of Tsushima?
2. 
Do you think the Russians ever had a realistic chance of beating the 
Japanese navy? Why or why not?
Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider2151914 Marne—Paris Is SavedLecture 32On September 2, 1914, French Flight Lieutenant Watteau took off on 
a reconnaissance mission that would change history. In less than a 

month, the German armies had swept through Belgium and across northern France and were within 40 miles of Paris. Watteau’s mission was 

to scout the movements of the westernmost pincer of the German assault, 
the army of General Alexander von Kluck. But Watteau noted that instead 

of continuing their westward push, the German soldiers were marching east. 
When the French high command received this report, they realized that this 


battle, fought along the Marne River, would result in an allied victory so 

dramatic that it is often called “the miracle of the Marne.”The OpponentsBy 1914, the nations of Europe were bound together in a complex web of treaties and agreements that virtually ensured that if any 
two of them went to war, all the rest would be drawn in, as well. 

Against this diplomatic background, tensions were rising that made 

Among these tensions were the ongoing naval arms race between Britain and Germany, ethnic unrest in the Balkans, German imperial 

ambitions, French resentments lingering from the Franco-Prussian 
War, and territorial rivalries between Austria-Hungary and Russia. 

As it turned out, the spark that ignited World War I and set into 

motion the preordained chain of alliances and declarations of war 
was the assassination of the Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand by 

a Serbian.The greatest challenge for the Germans in a general European war was facing France on one side and Russia on the other. In 1894, 

then Chief of Staff Alfred von Schlieffen created a plan that had 

Germany immediately launching a massive offensive against 
216Lecture 32: 1914 Marne—Paris Is SavedFrance as soon as war was declared and defeating it within weeks. Then, using Germany’s excellent rail system, the troops could be 

rushed back to the Russian frontier. 
The powerful right wing of the German army would swing to the north, crossing through neutral Belgium before enveloping Paris 
and the main body of the French army. The violation of Belgian 

territory would most likely bring Great Britain into the war, but 

the British army had fewer than 100,000 men available for quick 
deployment in Europe. It was a bold plan, with little room for error or the unexpected. In Schlieffen’s concept, everything depended on the right wing, which 

had to be powerful enough to punch through any opposition and 
keep advancing without losing momentum. He was willing to risk 
weakening other sectors to ensure that it would be strong enough 
and constantly fretted that less daring commanders might alter his 
plan by distributing the troops more evenly. 
His successor as Chief of Staff was Helmuth von Moltke, the nephew 
and namesake of the great Moltke who had led Germany to victories 

in the Austro-Prussian and Franco-Prussian wars. Moltke assigned 

eight new divisions to the German center and added only one to the 

crucial right wing. Worse, at a key moment, he lost his nerve and 

prematurely shifted two corps from the French front to the Russian, 

further weakening the power of the German offensive thrust. 
The French General Staff made several incorrect assumptions about 
how the Germans would behave. 
o First, they didn’t believe that the Germans would violate 


meet an attack from that direction. o Second, they grossly underestimated the number of troops 

estimated that they were facing 43 German divisions, when 
there were actually 83. 217o Finally, the French had invested in building a chain of 
fortresses along the border with Germany and were convinced 
that any attacks would be aimed at these and that such attacks 

would be doomed against their well-protected batteries of 
heavy cannons. In the years just before the war, the French had begun to shift from 

for the outbreak of war—Plan 17. They had become convinced that 

wars were decided by morale and that the side with the greater will 



outbreak of war, Plan 17 called for four French armies to launch a 

powerful attack on Alsace and Lorraine. 
The CampaignOn August 3, 1914, Germany declared war on France, and all these 
long-formulated plans were put into motion. Every day, 550 well-

organized trains transported German soldiers and equipment across 

the Rhine, launching nearly a million and a half men against France. 
By August 4, German troops were pouring into Belgium, and Great 

Britain declared war on Germany. 
The crucial right wing of the German attack was the First Army, 
commanded by General Alexander von Kluck. The plan ran into 



fought back. Several Belgian fortresses put up spirited defenses 
and managed to hold out until August 15. Despite this setback, the 

Germans were close to maintaining their original schedule Meanwhile, the French had put Plan 17 into motion. With the 
German defenders proving to be both more numerous and more 
deadly than French plans had allowed for—in less than a week, 
more than 300,000 French soldiers were mowed down—the 
offensive bogged down in the forests. By August 24, the French 

armies were forced to pull back to their original lines.218Lecture 32: 1914 Marne—Paris Is SavedWhile Plan 17 was foundering against the German center, the 
British Expeditionary Force (BEF), a highly professional army of 
about 80,000 men, had been deployed near Mons. Here, they fought 
but they were in an exposed position and had to retreat. In this moment of crisis, the overall commander of the French forces opposing Moltke was General Joseph Joffre. He was supremely 



was exactly the right man for the job. He coolly drew together the 
shattered remnants of the French armies and began methodically 
assembling a new Sixth Army to defend Paris. 
The BattleThe unexpected Belgian resistance, the enthusiastic French attacks 
on the frontier, and the strong showing of the BEF undermined 


of his opponents. Now, from the eastern front came news that the 



men to invade East Prussia. On August 25, Moltke ordered two army corps to be withdrawn 
from the assault on France and sent to the eastern front. By the time 


retrospect, the redeployment of the two army corps meant that at 
the very moment when the German forces in the west needed to 
press home their attack, they found themselves with a sizable gap in 

The apparent weakness of the French opposition caused Moltke to consider deviating from the initial plan for enveloping the French 
armies and to try breaking straight through them. He issued orders 
altering the role of Kluck’s army from the main enveloping force 


continued his drive west, but he, too, was worried that his weakened 
army might not be able to complete its wide sweep. Thus, around 
219September 1, his army began the fateful change in direction detected by the reconnaissance aircraft of the allies. On August 26, General Joseph Gallieni was appointed military 
governor of Paris and charged with its defense. He energetically 


the opportunity that the shift in Kluck’s direction offered for 



the enemy. Once the 

change of direction had 


determined to use the new 
Sixth Army. 
Joffre gained British 
cooperation, and by 
September 5, the 
counterattack was 
underway. Kluck began 

to pivot to try to meet the 
danger, but this maneuver 

had the effect of creating 

a dangerous gap between 
his army and the adjacent 
Second German Army. 

The confrontation took 
place near the Marne 



 Saint-Soupplets. Over several days, the German advance was fought to a standstill, and the counterattacking French elements began to arrive and make 


one of the gaps between the German armies, where it threatened 
to cut off Kluck’s army. On September 9, the commander of the 

German Second Army recognized that the offensive had come up 
The initial trenches dug after the Battle of the Marne would proliferate, 
transforming the landscape of northern 
France into a grotesque world of mud, 
barbed wire, and shell holes.220Lecture 32: 1914 Marne—Paris Is Savedshort and made the decision to start withdrawing his troops. Kluck’s 
First Army soon followed. Paris—and France—were saved. 
OutcomesThe halting of the German advance at the Battle of the Marne left both sides enmeshed in a war that neither had anticipated or prepared 
for. With the failure of the Schlieffen Plan, the Germans had lost 

their best chance to win the war, and by failing to aggressively 

follow up the victory at the Marne, the allies had probably lost their 
best opportunity to bring the war to a rapid end. Each side was now locked into an escalating and seemingly 

10 million men would be dead and another 20 million wounded. 
It could be argued that all the horrible and destructive remainder 

of World War I was the legacy of the Battle of the Marne and the 

chances that both sides missed to end the war quickly. 
Herwig, The Marne.Sumner, 
The First Battle of the Marne. Tuchman, 
The Guns of August
. 1. 
If the Germans had stuck to the spirit of Schlieffen’s original plan, could 
they have won World War I?
2. 
How did the technological advances in military equipment in the 

early 20th century lead to the stalemate of trench warfare, and was this 
inevitable?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider2211939 Khalkhin Gol—Sowing the Seeds of WWIILecture 33The Battle of Khalkhin Gol, fought between Russia and Japan in 1939, 
dispute concerning a 10-mile strip of featureless steppe at the point where Mongolia, Manchuria, and China converge. It was an accidental 






technological testing ground for new weapons, yet it remains a relatively 
little-known event. Probably the most surprising aspect of its obscurity 


World War II. 
Background to Khalkhin Gol
Since Japan embarked on its rapid industrialization in the late 19th century, its greatest challenge had been obtaining the natural 
resources required by large-scale mechanization. Thus, Japan’s 

imperial ambitions focused on conquering regions where these raw 

the mainland of Asia. 
The military commanders were the most aggressive advocates for expansionism in Manchuria, Korea, and other mainland regions, 
and because the military enjoyed the emperor’s favor, this policy 

prevailed, resulting in Japan’s occupation of Manchuria and China 

in the 1930s. In these campaigns, the Japanese army experienced a 

began to eye Mongolia and Siberia. During the 1930s, the portion of the Japanese armed forces that occupied Manchuria, now organized into the puppet state of 

Manchukuo, had developed an odd structural relationship to the 
rest of the military. It was known as the Kwantung Army after the 
222Lecture 33: 1939 Khalkhin Gol—Sowing the Seeds of WWIIprovince where it originated, and it operated semi-autonomously, 
although its commanders were expected to follow general Japanese 
policy. 
The immediate cause of the Battle of Khalkhin Gol was the ambiguous borders between the Japanese puppet state of 
Manchukuo and the Russian puppet state of Mongolia. In particular, 

the Japanese maintained that for a stretch of about 30 miles, the 
Halha River—called the Khalkhin Gol by the Mongolians—
demarcated the boundary. The Russians instead claimed that the 

border ran about 10 miles to the north. The BattleIn March 1939, Major Masanobu Tsuji of the Kwantung army 
staff drafted a new set of guidelines for how to respond to minor 

border clashes. Major Tsuji was a fanatical Japanese militarist and 

nationalist who viewed foreigners as racial inferiors and believed 

set of instructions decreed, “If any Soviets cross the frontiers, 
annihilate them without delay,” and “Where boundary lines are not 


establish boundaries.” On May 11,
 1939, a 20-man patrol of the People’s Republic of 
Mongolia was spotted moving through the disputed zone between 
the Halha River and the village of Nomonhan. A group of 40 

Manchukuan cavalrymen drove them away after a brief skirmish. 
Both sides then reported the incident. The Japanese sent more than 

50 aircraft to search for the enemy. 
Meanwhile, the Russians also responded, ordering a battalion 
of infantry to the scene, accompanied by some light tanks and 

artillery. When the Japanese detected this force, they decided to 

implement Tsuji’s directive to annihilate the enemy and dispatched 

more than 2,000 men, supported by artillery and tankettes, to 

locate and crush them. 
223A pitched battle took place on May 28. The Japanese had badly 
underestimated both the size and the quality of the Russian 
opposition. The Russians had equipped even their light tanks and 

armored cars with relatively heavy cannons, which chewed up the 
weakly armed and armored Japanese. The Japanese high command wanted to avoid this distraction, but 
invasion. The Kwantung Army staff eventually came around and 

committed a large force to a renewed attack. This group featured 

Japan’s only independent tank brigade, which boasted two 

regiments of medium tanks and one of light tanks. The Japanese 

estimated that to oppose this powerful army, the Russians could 

muster only around 1,000 infantry and a dozen tanks. 
had reinforced the area with a large army of their own. Most 

had deployed 186 tanks and 266 armored cars, almost all of them 
more heavily armed. In addition, a new commander had been 


of Russia’s greatest generals. 
After some preliminary aerial warfare, the Japanese launched their offensive, executing a successful night attack in which their tanks 

charged and scattered an unsuspecting Russian infantry regiment. 


unable to coordinate their movements with the supporting infantry, 

and many of his superior armored vehicles were knocked out by 
Japanese suicide attacks. 


began to wipe out the surrounded pockets of Japanese troops and 
vehicles. The remaining Japanese had no choice but to attempt 


224Lecture 33: 1939 Khalkhin Gol—Sowing the Seeds of WWIIJapanese assaults, but the momentum had decisively shifted in favor of the Russians. 
strength to launch his own major attack. He devised a plan in 
which his center would hold the Japanese in place while his tank-

heavy right and left wings would sweep around and encircle the 
enemy. On August 20, he launched his attack, and by August 29, the 

Japanese were trapped in three pockets and largely wiped out. 
OutcomesThis undeclared border war had important and far-reaching effects 
on both Japan and Russia, as well as on the course and outcome of 
World War II. For the Japanese, the shocking failure of their army at 

Khalkhin Gol resulted in a dramatic reorientation of strategic plans. 
o Before the battle, the army had been dominant and favored a policy of northern expansion. Now the Japanese navy gained 
the upper hand. Rather than advocating attacking on the Asian 

mainland, the navy urged a policy of southern expansion, in 

which the targets for Japanese imperialism would include 

the resource-rich regions of the Dutch East Indies, French 
Indochina, and the Philippines. o The only force that could constitute a threat to this southern-directed imperialism was the U.S. Navy. Therefore, Japanese 

war planning concentrated on eliminating the U.S. Navy to 
enable the Japanese to carry out their planned conquests. The 

solution was an attack on Pearl Harbor. 
On the Russian side, the battle also produced momentous consequences. During the summer of 1939, both Britain and 
Germany were actively seeking alliances with Russia. On the one 
hand, the British and the French desired Russian aid in curbing 
Hitler’s ambitions; on the other, Hitler felt that he could not launch 

his planned invasion of Western Europe until he had ensured that 

the Russians would not attack him.225In the end, Stalin chose to sign a nonaggression treaty with Germany 
that included secret provisions carving up Poland between them and 

after the agreement was signed, German tanks rolled into Poland, 

A main reason why Stalin choose to side with Hitler, especially when 
there were signs that Hitler would eventually turn against Russia, was 



Hitler were negotiating. Stalin viewed Japan as a perennial threat on 

his eastern frontier and feared a two-front war against Japan in the 

east and Germany in the west. Khalkhin Gol therefore played a key 

role in initiating World War II in Western Europe. 



that stripped the Russian military of almost all its experienced 

nonaggression treaty and invaded Russia in June 1941, these purges 

had left the Russian army ill-prepared to resist. 
were dispatched to the western front, where they had a major part 

in stopping Hitler’s invading armies: the troops who had fought at 



his success at Khalkhin Gol, he was appointed Chief of the General 
Staff, and in that role, he applied his experience and knowledge of 

integrated massed infantry, tanks, artillery, and aircraft to rally the 

The eastern troops and equipment were essential, as well. Khalkhin Gol provided a testing ground for many new weapons, particularly 
tanks. At Khalkhin Gol, the Russians were able to try out some of 

their new designs for armored vehicles and to learn to install in 
their tanks large cannon and hatches that could be locked from the 

inside. When the Germans invaded, the nastiest surprise was the 
226Lecture 33: 1939 Khalkhin Gol—Sowing the Seeds of WWIIvery high quality of the Russian tanks, which in many cases, were better armed and armored than the German panzers. The experience Russia’s troops gained in the east also paid 
dividends. At the moment when the German invasion posed its 

greatest threat, the Russians were able to shift 18 army divisions, 
1,700 tanks, and 1,500 aircraft from Mongolia to the western 
front, and the infusion of these experienced soldiers was critical to 
stopping the German advance. 
Russian counterattacks against the Germans that drove them out 
of the Soviet Union and back into Germany. In these offensives, 



and air attacks that he had perfected at Khalkhin Gol. Hitler’s 

invasion came close to succeeding; if not for Khalkhin Gol, Russia 
might well have lacked the leadership, the tactics, the technology, 

and the soldiers that ultimately made the difference. 
Coox, Nomonhan: Japan against Russia. Goldman, Nomonham 1939.1. 
What differing approaches to warfare were displayed by the Japanese 
and the Russians in the Battle of Khalkhin Gol?2. 
Do you agree or disagree with the arguments made for the long-term 

effects of Khalkin Gol? Why or why not?
Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider2271942 Midway—Four Minutes Change EverythingLecture 34In the 35 years following the Battle of Tsushima, big-gun battleships 
had ruled the waves, but on December 7, 1941, the Japanese attack on 
Pearl Harbor signaled the dawn of a new era of naval warfare: The once-
fearsome battleship was obsolete, and airplanes were now the dominant 


anticipated would feature close-range slugging matches between rows of 
battleships, would instead be decided by dueling aircraft carriers, separated 


one another. The most dramatic and pivotal of these carrier-versus-carrier 

matches took place in June of 1942 around the island of Midway.
The OpponentsThe person who most shaped the Battle of Midway was the 

studied at the Japanese Staff College and was then sent to the 

United States for several years. He attended Harvard University 
and was appointed as a naval attaché in Washington, D.C. Back in 

Japan, he commanded several ships, including the aircraft carrier 
Akagi, and this experience made him an early advocate of air power 
in naval warfare. Yamamoto was part of the naval faction that resisted the army’s 
adventurism in China and Manchuria, and he opposed provoking a 

would be able to use their enormous natural resources and industrial 
capacity to overwhelm Japan. When Japan nevertheless committed 




devise a plan to maximize Japan’s chances of victory. 

destroy or disable its battleships and aircraft carriers, freeing the 228Lecture 34: 1942 Midway—Four Minutes Change EverythingJapanese navy to capture the Philippines and the Dutch East Indies, whose natural resources were vital raw materials for Japan’s 


What did not go according to plan was that the U.S. aircraft carriers were out of port when Pearl Harbor was attacked. As the 

war progressed and it became clear that victory at sea would be 
determined by air power, all that stood between Japan and its goal 


American aircraft carriers. Yamamoto began to craft a plan to lure 

these ships out to do battle where the superior Japanese forces could 
catch and sink them. Yamamoto had always had a predilection for complex, multipart 
operations, but his scheme to trap the American carriers was 

the most elaborate yet. It featured a vast armada and thousands 
of soldiers on troop transports to carry out planned invasions. 
The main strike force of four large carriers was commanded by 
 Admiral Nagumo. The key to the plan was the tiny island of Midway, the last 
outpost in the American defenses before Pearl Harbor. The main 

Japanese strike force would bomb Midway, and troops would land 

and occupy it. Meanwhile, another task force would invade the 
Aleutian island chain leading to Alaska. Yamamoto was sure that 

the Americans would send their aircraft carriers and the remnants of 


they would be attacked by planes from the Japanese carriers and 
sent to the bottom of the ocean. The Japanese believed that the Americans could not muster more 
than two carriers to oppose them at Midway; thus, the four Japanese 
carriers would be more than enough to deal with the Americans. 

In reality, they would face three large American carriers that could 

launch 233 aircraft, compared to the 248 that the four Japanese 
carriers could launch. Despite the size of their armada, Japanese 229
category that really mattered. The Japanese were unaware that the Americans had advance warning 
of Yamamoto’s plan. American intelligence agents had managed to 

partially decipher their code; thus, the American commanders knew 

the basic outline of the Japanese strategy, including the fact that 

Midway was the target and when the Japanese intended to strike it. 
Yamamoto’s American counterpart was Admiral Chester Nimitz, 
a tough, no-nonsense leader with a long career in the navy. In the 

aftermath of Pearl Harbor, he was appointed commander-in-chief 



the battle were the highly experienced carrier commander Jack 
Fletcher and Raymond Spruance, known for his calm demeanor and 
calculating mind. Once he knew Yamamoto’s plan, Nimitz saw an opportunity to 
turn the tables and potentially deliver a serious blow. He heavily 



B-17 bombers there. He positioned his carriers 325 miles northeast of 

the island, where he hoped they could ambush Yamamoto’s carriers. 
The BattleAt dawn on June 4, the main Japanese carrier group launched a strike force of 108 planes against Midway. Fighter planes from 

Midway intercepted it, and the outdated and outclassed American 

planes were shot down by the faster, more maneuverable, more 


Meanwhile, both sides had been deploying reconnaissance aircraft to search for the other. Most of Nagumo’s reconnaissance planes 

were launched by catapults from his heavy cruisers. One, Number 
4, was half an hour late taking off from the cruiser 
Tone
 because 
of problems with its catapult. As chance would have it, the sector 

of ocean that this plane had been assigned to search was the one 230Lecture 34: 1942 Midway—Four Minutes Change Everythingcontaining the American carriers; thus, Number 4’s sighting of 
them was delayed a crucial half-hour. 
Meanwhile, Fletcher and Spruance had already received reports locating at least two Japanese aircraft carriers. Beginning early 
in the morning, the Hornet and the 
Enterprise launched 116 
aircraft against these targets, including 67 dive bombers and 29 

torpedo planes. Because the Americans were still using outdated 



coherent group, the various squadrons became separated and spaced 
out at different intervals and altitudes. 
Even worse, some of the squadrons followed erroneous courses that would cause them to miss their targets altogether. In addition to 

these planes, a number of aircraft from Midway had been directed 
toward the Japanese carriers, including a unit of medium bombers The Japanese raid on Pearl Harbor destroyed or disabled the U.S. battleship dominant weapon in naval warfare.© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock. 231operated by the army, a Marine squadron of dive bombers, and 
some torpedo bombers. When an aircraft carrier is defending itself against aerial attacks, 

these intercept the incoming bombers and shoot them down 
before they can get into range to release their weapons. In combat 
situations, it was standard procedure among both the Japanese and 


Air Patrol (CAP), perpetually circling over their carriers. On the 



carriers; the CAP shot down 18 of 37, with most of the rest being 

forced to release their weapons prematurely. Then, a group of 14 

B-17s made a high-altitude run, dropping their bombs from where 


any Japanese ship. Yamamoto had ordered Nagumo to keep half his planes in reserve, 
loaded with anti-ship weapons, in case the U.S. carriers appeared. 
Now, Nagumo disobeyed this command and ordered these planes 

rearmed with bombs to launch a second strike on Midway. Just at 

this moment, the delayed Number 4 radioed in that it had sighted 
the American ships. 
Meanwhile, Fletcher had decided to follow the planes that were 
Hornet and the 
Enterprise with those 
from the Yorktown

planes to the battle. 
Hornet and 
Enterprise arrived 
over Nagumo’s ships and launched their attacks against the three 

carriers they could see. Arriving in uncoordinated bunches, the dive 

bombers and torpedo planes made brave attacks but fell in great 

232Lecture 34: 1942 Midway—Four Minutes Change EverythingNearly 100 American bombers assaulted Nagumo’s ships, and still 
not one hit had been scored. But all of these torpedo plane attacks had pulled the protective 
several more squadrons of planes from the Yorktown
 and 
Enterprise arrived, the dive bombers were able to attack without interference. 
In four minutes, three of Japan’s front-line carriers had been 

mortally wounded. 
Hiryu, now launched its planes. Although 
only a relatively small force, the veteran pilots pressed their attack 
against the Yorktown 
with determination. Of seven dive bombers, three scored direct hits and two others dropped their bombs close 
enough to cause damage. The last act of the battle came in the late 

afternoon, when the Americans sent their remaining planes against 

the HiryuOutcomesAt the Battle of Midway, the action of just four minutes permanently 

had a solid edge in numbers of carriers; after Midway, the United 

States enjoyed a numerical advantage that rapidly and irrevocably 
increased as the country’s industrial capacity came on line. 
Before Midway, the Japanese were always victorious and always 
on the offensive. After Midway, the roles reversed, and it was the 

United States that would consistently be on the offensive for the 

rest of the war and the Japanese who were forced to defend an ever-

shrinking empire.Fuchida, et al., Midway.Prange, Miracle at Midway.Symonds, The Battle of Midway.Suggested Reading2331. 

defeat at Midway?2. 
Which of the following men was the greatest admiral, and why: Agrippa, 

Don Juan, Nelson, Yi, Togo, or Yamamoto? 
Questions to Consider234

Lecture 35In early 1941, Germany was at the height of its power and self-assurance. Its armies and blitzkrieg tactics had proved invincible. Its soldiers were 
highly trained, experienced, and battle-tested. The German army was at a 
peak size of 3.5 million men with 3,300 tanks. At the same time, the Russian 

army was the largest in the world and had as many modern tanks and aircraft 

as the rest of the world’s armies combined. But its men were demoralized, 



paranoid purges in the 1930s. Thus, although the Russian army was massive, 

it had low morale and no leadership. It was at this moment that Hitler would 
stab his former allies in the back and invade Russia.Invasion of RussiaConsidering the potential strength of Russia and the size of its army, it seems foolish that Hitler would elect to take on such an 

enemy and to provoke a war on two fronts, one of the classic errors 
of strategy. Why, then, did he choose to invade Russia? There are 

several likely explanations. 
o From Hitler’s perspective, by early 1941, it was reasonable 
to assume that the war in the West was more or less over. 



seem inclined to do so. The only enemy left was Britain, and 

although the British were safe on their island thanks to their 
navy, their army posed no threat. The German army was at a 



this edge. o Further, the racist ideology of Hitler and the Nazis led them to 
believe that the Russians would be easy prey. In Nazi ideology, 

the Russians were categorized as Slavs, a lesser race of human 
beings. Hitler assumed that the Russian armies would crumble 
before his legions of Aryan supermen. 
235The code name for the invasion of Russia was Operation Barbarossa, and it was to be a classic blitzkrieg. Armored spearheads would 

plunge through the Russian lines on narrow fronts, then rapidly 
speed deep within enemy territory. They would then curve back 

toward one another, encircling huge chunks of the Russian army. 

The panzers would carve up the Russians, and the infantry and 
artillery following the tanks would force the isolated Russian 
groups to surrender. 
With its army obliterated, it was believed that Russia itself would 



unknowingly assisted the Germans in their strategy by deploying 
most of their army right along the border, thus playing right into the 

Germans’ hands. 
Operation Barbarossa began on June 22, 1941, with a massive artillery barrage and air attacks. Then, the panzers rolled forward. 



for the Germans. The panzers blasted through the Russian lines and 

cruised deep into Russia. Some panzer groups were averaging 50 

miles per day, a rate previously unheard of in war. 
As the invasion stretched into the fall, unease began to creep into the 
that no matter how many hundreds of miles they advanced, there 
was always more ahead. And no matter how many men they killed 

and tanks they wiped out, new ones kept appearing. Even though 
the Germans were eliminating Russian armies at a phenomenal rate, 

The Germans, on the other hand, could not so easily make good their losses of experienced men or valuable tanks. By the winter of 
1941, the Germans had reeled off a string of astonishing victories 

and had progressed 800 miles into Russia, but they had lost nearly 
65 percent of their men and vehicles. 236
Finally, the rainy season turned the terrin into a sea of mud, and the 
German advance began to lose momentum and bog down. Worse 

was yet to come, however, because the traditional ultimate weapon 

of Russia was about to arrive—a powerful force that the Russians 
referred to as “General Winter.” By December 1, temperatures 

plummeted to –35° F. 
Hitler had considered it unnecessary to provide the soldiers with winter clothing because he believed that the Russians would 
be beaten before winter arrived. As a result, the German troops 

suffered severe frostbite; the oil in guns jammed, and the guns 


metal parts became brittle and snapped in the cold. The German 



the Germans settled in for the winter. 
The Battle By early summer of 1942, the Germans were ready to resume the assault on Russia. Over the winter, Hitler had revised his goals, and 

oil played a central role. In this era of mechanized warfare, it had 
quickly become apparent that the machines required huge amounts 
of fuel to keep running. Germany’s only reliable fuel came from 


motors of his planes and tanks. Most of Russia’s oil came from the Caucasus—80 percent from Baku 
alone. Obsessed with both the need to obtain new sources of oil for 

Germany and the idea of cutting Russia off from its own oil, Hitler 

decided to concentrate his attack on the southern front, with the aim 

of gaining control over the Russian oil wells in the Caucasus. 
The advances of 1942 would have two objectives: One group would push toward Stalingrad on the Volga River, which contained 

a number of large factories and sat astride the railways that brought 

oil from the Caucasus. If the Germans could seize Stalingrad, in 
theory, they could cut off these supplies. A second German army 
237group would drive even further to the south, directly at the oil  General Friedrich Paulus was charged with capturing Stalingrad, 
and his army drove to the city and prepared to assault it. But Stalin 
decided to make a stand 
at the city that was named 
after him. He issued a 
directive that the Russians 
would not yield one more 
step back. To enforce this 

order, all Russian army 

units were required to 
organize detachments of 

men armed with machine 
guns who would stand 
behind the front line with 
orders to shoot any man who 
retreated. In August, Stalin 


 charge of resisting the 

German invasion.
bombarded Stalingrad with 
planes, reducing it to vast 


German soldiers then began 
moving in, squeezing the Russians into an ever-smaller section of 


the German edge in mobility was negated. As 1942 wore on, Hitler grew obsessed with the symbolic value of Stalingrad, and he began to divert resources away from the more 

o Tank units that would have been better employed seizing the 

factory areas of Stalingrad were 
transformed into nightmarish 
combat zones of rubble, through 
which small squads of Russian and 
German soldiers crawled, fought, 
and died. © Denis Dryashkin/iStock/Thinkstock.238
more troops to be fed into the battle for the city, Stalingrad 
became the focal point of the entire war in Russia. o The Russians, too, had sent reinforcements, but they had been playing a clever game in which they committed the bare 
minimum to the city to keep the Germans occupied while 
secretly building up a reserve. As winter of 1942 approached, the all-important German drive to 
diverted to Stalingrad. Meanwhile, the Russians were down to only 
a few hundred yards of ground as winter set in, but their objective 
had been achieved. The Germans had bled themselves dry in the 

useless battle. With the arrival of winter, the German offensive 


commanders had amassed a large reserve; with these men, they 

now attacked the Germans. Two years of war had served to replace 


had experience in modern warfare. They imitated blitzkrieg tactics 

and turned them back against the Germans. 
the enemy in place while launching pincers to the left and right. 
Two powerful Russian armies blasted through the German lines on 

either side of Stalingrad, then trapped Paulus and his entire army. 

Hitler refused to acknowledge that his attack on Stalingrad had 
failed and utterly rejected any suggestion that Paulus and his army 
try to escape while they had the chance. 
effectively, and Paulus was forced to surrender the miserable 


army had surrendered, and its loss was an enormous and crippling 
blow to the Germans, both materially and psychologically. 
239OutcomesAlthough the Germans attempted several more offensives, for the 

was the turning point of the war against Nazi Germany. 
Before Stalingrad, the Germans retained an aura of invincibility that was utterly destroyed along with Paulus’s army. Before Stalingrad, 

the Germans were constantly advancing and expanding their 

empire, but after this battle, they were entirely on the defensive, 
struggling to protect a steadily contracting territory. 


ultimately became a war of attrition, one in which the Germans 
could not compete with Russia’s resources. Even though the 


the Russians were willing to accept the unequal ratio, and in the 
end, the Germans were helpless before the vast and unstoppable 
Red Army. 
Beevor, 
Stalingrad.Clark, Barbarossa
.Craig, Enemy at the Gates. 1. 
What might Germany have done differently to increase its chance of 
success on the Eastern Front?2. 
How much do you think the fact that the city was named “Stalingrad” 
had to do with both Hitler’s determination to conquer it and Stalin’s 

determination to defend it?Suggested ReadingQuestions to Consider240Lecture 36: Recent & Not-So-Decisive Decisive BattlesRecent & Not-So-Decisive Decisive BattlesLecture 36Given the frequency of warfare and its often wide-ranging and dramatic consequences, it comes as no surprise that many individual 
battles have been decisive turning points. As we’ve seen, a battle 
can be decisive for many reasons: a change in rulers, destruction of a 
state’s armed forces and loss of its ability to wage war, the advent of a new 

technology, or the introduction of social or religious changes. Often, truly 

decisive battles have more than one of these effects. In this last lecture, we 

will discuss a few recent battles that might turn out to be among the decisive 
ones of history and examine some particularly famous battles that may not 
be as decisive as was once thought.In November 1947, U.N. Resolution 181 attempted to create two separate states out of the old British protectorate of Palestine—
one for Arabs and one for Jews. This sparked ongoing unrest in 

the disputed territories until, on May 14, 1948, the Jewish state of 

Israel declared its existence and was immediately recognized by 
key international powers. The next day, a coalition of Arab states 

invaded Israel and attempted to destroy it. 
armies and militias, almost all of them using curious mixtures of 
whatever leftover equipment from World War II they could lay their 

hands on. The Israelis thwarted each of the offensives and initiated 

counterattacks. Between February and July 1949, Israel signed 
separate armistices with each of the Arab nations involved, bringing 



War for Israeli Independence. 
As a result of this war, Israel ended up with not only the territory 
given to it by the U.N. resolution but with a good bit of the land 
allocated to the planned Arab state, as well. Continuing tensions led 
241to the 1967 rematch known as the Six Day War. This war ended 
with Israel gaining control over more territories, including the Gaza 
Strip, the Sinai Peninsula, the West Bank, East Jerusalem, and the 

Golan Heights. The outcomes of these wars have set the stage for many of the developments and political crises of the past several decades. 
Tensions and resentments among Israel, the Palestinians, and 

various Arab states still constantly threaten to break out into a new 




deserves a place on the list of decisive battles. Dien Bien Phu (1954)After World War II, France’s rule in its old colonial territory of 
Indochina was challenged by communist Viet Minh insurgents 

under the leadership of Ho Chi Minh. By the early 1950s, with the 
Viet Minh receiving support from communist China, the French 

were struggling to maintain control. The French commanders came up with a plan to establish a strong point deep in northeastern Vietnam, which they hoped would disrupt 


a pitched battle, where the technologically superior French troops 
could destroy them. The site chosen for the French forward base 

was Dien Bien Phu.The Viet Minh responded by moving in 50,000 troops and 
considerable artillery under the able command of General Vo 

Nguyen Giap. The result was a seven-week siege, during which 

the outnumbered French paratroopers were under constant 
bombardment from hidden Viet Minh artillery and had to fend off 

numerous attacks by waves of infantry. After a desperate defense, 

they were at last overcome.The defeat at Dien Bien Phu was crushing for the French, both materially and psychologically. Within a few months, the French 
242Lecture 36: Recent & Not-So-Decisive Decisive Battlesleft Southeast Asia for good, signing the Geneva Accords and 
dividing the remainder of their former colony along the 17th parallel 
into independent North and South Vietnams. 
Dien Bien Phu was a decisive battle for several reasons. First, it ended the Indochina War and symbolically closed the door on the 

era of western colonialism in Asia. Second, it directly led to the 

Vietnam War, because the United States unsuccessfully stepped in 

and attempted to oppose further Viet Minh expansion into the newly 

created South Vietnam. Finally, it set the blueprint for many of the 


major Western power with a high-tech army faced a non-Western, 

low-tech army that frequently employed guerilla warfare. The Teutoburg Forest (9 A.D.)
Among the battles often considered decisive but perhaps not so is the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest, which some have argued was the 

reason the Romans never conquered Germany as they had Gaul.Julius Caesar’s conquest of Gaul in the 50s B.C. established 
the Rhine River as the frontier between Roman territory and the 
Germania. In the later years of the reign of the emperor Augustus, 

the Romans began to probe into Germania and form diplomatic ties 
with some of the seminomadic Germanic tribes. The Romans had always pursued a policy of incorporating warlike locals into their own auxiliary forces and granting local elites Roman 
privileges. Thus, the Roman governor of the region, Quinctilius 

Varus, had on his staff a young nobleman of the Cherusci tribe who 

had been given the Roman name Arminius, along with equestrian 

rank and citizenship. But Arminius was only feigning cooperation with the Romans. In 9 
A.D., Arminius persuaded Varus to move his three legions to winter 

quarters by a route that would lead them through dense German 
forests and swampland. On the march through the forests, the 
18,000 men of Varus’s command were strung out and vulnerable. 
243Arminius’s German allies struck the Roman column in a series of 
hit-and-run ambushes, and a running battle developed that lasted 
for several days as the desperate legionaries sought to break out of 

the restrictive terrain while under constant attack. In the end, all 
three legions were wiped out, making the Battle of the Teutoburg 

Forest one of the worst defeats in Roman historyThose who assert that this battle was decisive claim that as a result 
of it, the Romans never conquered Germany as they had Gaul. 
Among the cited long-term effects are the preservation of Germanic 

culture and languages, including its descendant, English. But it 
is extremely unlikely that the Romans would have conquered 
Germania or, even if they had, that they would have been successful 

in imposing Roman civilization. 
o Two hallmarks of Roman civilization were that it was an 
urban phenomenon that thrived in cities and that it was a 

Mediterranean culture that prospered best along the shores of 
that sea. o Occupied by nomadic tribes, Germany lacked not only cities, but even any modest-sized towns. It had a completely different 

climate from the Mediterranean, and the economic system 
was based on a separate group of crops and foodstuffs. Gaul, 

by contrast, was already urbanized when Caesar arrived and 
shared the Mediterranean climate and crops. o Conversely, while the Romans might militarily subdue some 
non-olive-growing regions, those tended to be the same ones 
that quickly threw off Roman rule or where its culture never 

displaced the indigenous one. Therefore, although the Battle of 

the Teutoburg Forest was a dramatic event, it did not determine 

the cultural future of Central Europe. D-Day (1944)The D-Day landings of June 6, 1944, are often numbered among the decisive battles of history, routinely portrayed as the turning 
244Lecture 36: Recent & Not-So-Decisive Decisive Battlespoint in World War II—the moment when the fall of Nazi Germany 
was assured. 
o The opening of the second front certainly hastened the end of the war, but a good case can be made that the turning point 

against the Nazis 
had happened when 
the Germans were 
defeated at Moscow  and Stalingrad. o It is clear that the Russians would have 
continued their drive 

toward Germany, that 

the Germans would 
have been unable to 
stop them, and that 
the Russians would 
not have been content 
with anything less  

than the destruction  and subjugation of  

Nazi Germany. 
o Even after D-Day had thoroughly established 
the Western Front, 

Hitler still viewed the 
Russians as the main threat, and the vast majority of German 
resources continued to be deployed on the Eastern Front. If D-Day was not a decisive factor in defeating the Nazis, however, 

was the annihilation of the German Air Force by the Allied powers. 

The thousands of aircraft destroyed by the Western Allies might 

well have made a pivotal difference had they been sent to the east. 

Another vital contribution to Germany’s defeat was the British 

already doomed by the time D-Day 
occurred; although the Allied 

invasion certainly hastened the end 
of the war, it was not a decisive 

turning point. © Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock. 245and American strategic bombing campaign, which greatly reduced 
Germany’s industrial capacity. 
The D-Day landings actually were a pivotal moment in history, 
although not for the reason usually supposed. Consider what would 
likely have happened to postwar Europe if the Western Allies had 

not landed in France and overrun most of Western Europe. There 

is a good chance that Russian armies would have claimed those 
In the end, the Normandy landings were a decisive moment in history, not because they saved the freedom of Western 

Europe from the domination of Nazi Germany, but because they 

preserved the freedom of Western Europe from domination by 

Communist Russia. Conclusions and What Ifs
Trying to pick and defend a list of the most decisive battles in 
history forces us to consider the reasons that history has unfolded 
as it has and to try to discover the complex webs of connections and 

Viewing history through the lens of decisive battles naturally 
leads to a great many questions that begin with the phrase “What 
if?” Such questions are fun as a kind of mental game, help us 
comprehend history, and hone our ability to tease out the crucial 

threads that weave the course of events. Such processes of debate 
and argument may be the best way both to appreciate the historical 

process and to gain a deeper understanding of it. Beevor, 
D-Day.Fall, Hell in a Very Small Place
.Glantz and House, When Titans Clashed
.Suggested Reading246Lecture 36: Recent & Not-So-Decisive Decisive Battles1. 
What post–World War II battles do you think should be 
considered decisive?2. 
Which battles would you include on your own list of the decisive battles 

of world history?Questions to Consider247BibliographyAdkins, Roy. 
Trafalgar: The Biography of a Battle
. London: Little Brown, 2004. Popular recounting of the battle.Amitai-Preiss, Reuven. Mongols and Mamluks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995. Scholarly book that narrowly focuses just on the 
Babur. 
The Baburnama: Memoirs of Babur, Prince and Emperor
. W. 
Thackston, trans. New York: Modern Library, 2002. Entertaining translation 

of Babur’s autobiography.
Beeching, Jack. The Galleys at Lepanto. New York: Scribner, 1982. Older 
standard narrative of the battle and events leading up to it.Beevor, Anthony. 
D-Day: The Battle for Normandy. New York: Penguin, 
2009. Another in the sequence of Beevor’s excellent books on the Second 

World War.
———. Stalingrad. New York: Viking, 1998. Well-written and well-


epic battle.Bicheno, Hugh. Crescent and Cross: The Battle of Lepanto, 1571
. London: Cassel, 2003. Work that focuses more narrowly on the campaign and battle 

itself than the other books listed.Bonk, David. Trenton and Princeton 1776–77
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2009. Typical Osprey publication—short, workmanlike summary, with 

particularly helpful maps and visuals.Bradbury, Jim. 
The Battle of Hastings. Stroud, Gloucestershire, UK: The 
History Press, 2010. Accessible, popular account of William’s life and career.
248BibliographyBrett-James, Antony. 
Europe against Napoleon: The Leipzig Campaign
. New York: Macmillan, 1970. Extensive collection of primary source 

accounts covering not just the battle but also the events leading up to it.Bruce, John. The Bayeux Tapestry
. London: Bracken Books, 1987. Outdated text, but it contains complete color plates of the entire tapestry.
Bryant, Anthony. 
Sekigahara 1600. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 1995. Probably the best accessible account in English of the campaign and Battle 
of Sekigahara.Cameron, Alan. The Last Pagans of Rome. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011. Up-to-date scholarly study of the 4
th century that 
includes a chapter on the Battle of Frigidus. Cameron argues that the sources 

have exaggerated the pagan/Christian nature of this battle.Cannadine, David. Trafalgar in History: A Battle and Its Afterlife
. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006. Interesting treatment that looks not only at 

the battle itself but also at what it has come to represent.Casson, L. Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World
. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1995. Scholarly but accessible survey of all types 
Chasteen, John. Americanos: Latin America’s Struggle for Independence
. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008. A good account of the complex story 

of the independence movements from Chile to Mexico. Much stronger on 
tracing political events than on military history but helpful for understanding 
the context of the battles.Clark, Alan. 
. New York: Quill, 1985. Solid overview of the entire story of the Eastern Front in 

World War II, from the invasion of Russia to the fall of Berlin.
Connolly, Peter. 
Greece and Rome at War
. London: Black Cat, 1981. Well-


249and tactics of both the Macedonian phalanx and the Roman manipular legion system.Coox, Alvin. Nomonhan: Japan against Russia. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1990. Reprint of a massive study (more than 1,200 pages) 
that heavily relies on Japanese sources.Corbett, J. S. Maritime Operations in the Russo-Japanese War, 1904–1905. 
Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1994. Massive two-volume study of 

the naval war, with an emphasis on strategic analysis. Rather technical but 

authoritative.Cotterrell, Arthur. 
Chariot: The Astounding Rise and Fall of the World’s First 
War Machine
. London: Pimlico, 2004. Interesting study of the development 
and role of the chariot in ancient warfare in the Mediterranean, India, and 
China.Craig, Gordon. The Battle of Königgrätz. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, 1964. Standard scholarly work on the battle by a famous 
historian.Craig, William. 
Enemy at the Gates. New York: Bantam, 1982. Somewhat 
dated but famous account of Stalingrad, with lots of details drawn from 
eyewitness accounts.Creasy, Edward Shepherd. 
Fifteen Decisive Battles of the World: From 
Marathon to Waterloo
. New York: Dorset Press, 1987 (1851). The book 
that started the modern era of debates over lists of decisive battles. Strong 
English and Western bias but still worth reading.
Crowly, Roger. 
Empires of the Sea: The Siege of Malta, the Battle of 
Lepanto, and the Contest for the Center of the World
. New York: Random 


Ottoman Turks and Christian Western Europe during the 16
th century.
D’Altroy, Terence. 
The Incas. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2002. Solid and readable survey of Inca history. Strong on economics and politics.
250BibliographyDavis, Paul. 100 Decisive Battles from Ancient Times to the Present
. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999. Well-balanced list of battles, with 

good, brief descriptions of each.De Souza, Philip, Waldemar Heckel, and Lloyd Llewellyn-Jones. 
The Greeks 
at War: From Athens to Alexander
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2004. Less on Plataea than on Greek equipment and tactics during this era. A nice 

introduction to many of the debates about hoplite warfare.Díaz, Bernal. The Conquest of New Spain. New York: Penguin, 1963. 
Translation of the eyewitness account of the conquest of Mexico by one of 

the conquistadors who participated. An amazing story.

Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–
1580. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1977.  Detailed 
study of early Portuguese overseas expansion, including accounts of the key 
battles along the coast of India.Donner, F. 
The Early Islamic Conquests. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981. Standard scholarly account. Stronger on the overall historical 
Dunlop, D. “A New Source of Information on the Battle of Talas or Atlakh.” 
Ural-Altaische Jahrbucher, vol. 36 (1965), pp. 326–330. Very useful article 
that gives complete translations of the main Arabic sources (al-Athir and al-

Dhahabi) for the battle of Talas.
Dwyer, William. 
The Day Is Ours! New York: Viking, 1983. Older but still 
good account of the battles of Trenton and Princeton that incorporates many 

nice quotes from primary sources.Engels, D. Alexander the Great and the Logistics of the Macedonian Army
. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978. Exactly what the title claims: 
an innovative study of how Alexander kept his army supplied and maintained 


251Englund, Peter. 
The Battle That Shook Europe: Poltava and the Birth of the 
Russian Empire
. London: Taurus, 2010. Best and most detailed account of 
the battle in English.Fall, Bernard. Hell in a Very Small Place: The Siege of Dien Bien Phu
. New York: Da Capo, 2002 (1967). Detailed account of the battle by a noted war 

journalist who was later killed in Viet Nam.
Farrokh, K. Shadows in the Desert: Ancient Persia at War
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2004. Comprehensive analysis of the armies of the Persian, 
Parthian, and Sassanian empires.Fischer, David Hackett. 
Washington’s Crossing
. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004. Pulitzer prize–winning book that is very detailed but highly 

readable.Fowler, Will. 
Santa Anna of Mexico
. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2007. Biography that is rather sympathetic in its portrayal of the Mexican 
leader.
Fox, Robin Lane. Alexander the Great
. London: Penguin, 1973. Solid biography of Alexander that gives a balanced account of his overall career.
Frassanito, William. 
Antietam: The Photographic Legacy of America’s 
Bloodiest Day. New York: Scribner, 1978. Interesting volume of 

Fuchida, Misuo, and Masatake Okumiya. Midway: The Battle That Doomed Japan. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2001 (1955). Book 
by a Japanese pilot that is interesting for the insights it offers on Japanese 

perspectives and experiences regarding the battle, though some of its claims 
are now disputed.Gardiner, Alan. 
The Kadesh Inscriptions of Ramesses II
Institute, 1960. Scholarly translation and commentary on the main sources of 
information for the Battle of Kadesh.252BibliographyGlantz, David, and Jonathan House. When Titans Clashed: How the Red 
Army Stopped Hitler. Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press, 1995. Important study that draws on previously unavailable Soviet archival 
material to give a more well-rounded account of the Eastern Front in World 

War II.
Goedicke, Hans, ed. Perspectives on the Battle of Kadesh. Baltimore: Halgo, 1985. A set of scholarly essays about aspects of the Battle of Kadesh.
Goldman, Stuart. Nomonham, 1939: The Red Army’s Victory That Shaped 
World War II
. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2012. The best up-to-
date, easily readable overall account of the battle and its effects.
Gravett, Christopher. 
Hastings 1066: The Fall of Saxon England. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2000. Another solid volume in the Osprey campaign 

series.Green, Peter. 
The Greco-Persian Wars
. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996. Good overview of the entire course of the wars between Greece 
and Persia by a noted historian.
The Journal of Hellenic Studies, vol. 67 (1947), pp. 77–89. Older but still useful scholarly article analyzing the battle.Gurval, R. Actium and Augustus
. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan 
Press, 1998. Study of the battle, especially as portrayed in Augustan 

propaganda.Haldon, J. Byzantium at War, AD 600–1453
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2002. Readable short survey of Byzantine military organization and tactics.
Haley, James. 
Sam Houston. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 2002. An excellent biography, well-researched and highly readable.
253Hammond, N. G. L. “The Campaign and Battle of Cynoscephalae in 197 BC.” The Journal of Hellenic Studies, vol. 108 (1988), pp. 60–82. Scholarly article reconstructing the battle and the events that led up to it.Hassig, Ross. Aztec Warfare: Imperial Expansion and Political Control
. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1988. Informative scholarly 
study of the military system used by the Aztecs to conquer and maintain their 

empire.Healy, Mark. 
The Warrior Pharaoh: Rameses II and the Battle of Qadesh
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 1993. Good basic overview of Ramesses and 
Kadesh aimed at a general audience.Heckel, Waldemar, and Ryan Jones. 
Macedonian Warrior
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2006. Good, well-illustrated survey on the training of, and 
especially the equipment used by, the Macedonian phalanx.
Hemming, John. The Conquest of the Incas. New York: Harcourt, 1970. 
Standard narrative that includes a full description of the rebellions and 
Herodotus. The Landmark Herodotus
. Robert Strassler, ed. New York: 
Pantheon Books, 2007. Excellent edition of all of Herodotus’s 
Histories, with translation, notes, maps, and useful appendices.———. Histories Book IX. Michael Flower and John Marincola, eds. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002. A scholarly commentary on the 

main ancient source for Plataea; contains useful information in the notes.Herwig, Holger. 
The Marne: The Opening of World War I and the Battle 
That Changed the World.
 New York: Random House, 2009. Solid coverage 
of the battle and surrounding events.Hibbert, Christopher. 
Wolfe at Quebec.
 New York: The World Publishing 
Company, 1959. Older, somewhat hagiographic but entertaining biography 

of Wolfe.
254BibliographyThe History of al-Tabari
, vols. 11 (
Khalid Yahya Blankinship, trans.) and 12 
(Yohanan Friedmann, trans.). 
Albany: State University of New York Press, 
1992, 1993. Good translation of the main surviving Arabic account of the 

battles of Yarmouk and al-Qadisiyyah.
Hofschroer, Peter. 
Leipzig 1813. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 1993. A 
somewhat technical treatment of the battle, with a very complete list of all 
the units involved.Holmes, Richard. 
. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2006. Very short blurbs on each battle, in what 

almost amounts to a survey of the history of warfare.Joglekar, Jaywant. 
Decisive Battles That India Lost. Lexington: Lulu, 1970. 

and their protagonists.Jukes, Geoffrey. 
The Russo-Japanese War
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, Kedar, B., ed. 
The Horns of Hattin: Proceedings of the Second Conference 
of the Society for the Study of the Crusades and the Latin East. London: Variorum, 1992. Collection of scholarly essays on the battle and related 

topics.Knight, Roger. 
The Pursuit of Victory: The Life and Achievement of Horatio 
Nelson. New York: Basic Books, 2007. Detailed biography of the famous 
admiral by a maritime history scholar.
Konstam, Angus. Poltava 1709. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2005. Short but 
well-illustrated narrative of the battle.Krefft, J. 

But Should. Centennial, CO: Military Writers Press, 2009. Contains a good 
chapter on the Battle of Badr.
255Lynch, John. 
Simón Bolívar: A Life
. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Detailed, even-handed biography of “the Liberator.”
Massie, Robert. Peter the Great
. New York: Random House, 1981. Best-
selling and entertaining biography of the Russian reformer that includes a 
full description of the Poltava campaign.Mathew, K. 
History of the Portuguese Navigation in India. Delhi: Mittal, 1988. Study of Portuguese colonialism in India, with an emphasis on naval 
affairs.
Maude, F. N. 
The Leipzig Campaign 1813. East Yorkshire, UK: Leonaur 
Publishing, 2007. Reprint of a 1908 publication. An old but still useful study 

of the battle.May, Timothy. 
The Mongol Art of War
. Yardley, PA: Westholme Publishing, 
2007. Good modern survey of how the Mongols waged war.
McEwan, Gordon. The Incas: New Perspectives. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2006. Informative overview of Incan culture and civilization, 
covering everything from religion to architecture.McPherson, James. Crossroads of Freedom: Antietam
. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. Excellent book by a leading Civil War historian that 



Millar, Simon. 
Vienna 1683
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2008. Short and clear narrative. Particularly strong on illustrations, maps, and the Battle of 
Kahlenberg that ends the siege.
Moore, Stephen. Eighteen Minutes: The Battle of San Jacinto and the Texas 
Independence Campaign. Dallas: Republic of Texas Press, 2004. Good 
overall account of the battle and surrounding events that incorporates a lot of 
interesting quotes from participants.256BibliographyMorgan, David. 
The Mongols. 2nd ed. New York: Wiley-Blackwell, 2007. 
Probably still the best general survey of the overall history of the Mongols, 
by a leading authority.
Morrison, J., J. F. Coates, and N. B. Rankov. 
Athenian Trireme: The History 
and Reconstruction of an Ancient Greek Warship
. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. Interesting account of the project to build the 
Olympias, a reconstructed Greek trireme, and explore its abilities.Nicolle, David. Yarmuk 636 AD
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 1994. Clear overview of the battle and associated campaign, with nice illustrations.———. Hattin 1187: Saladin’s Greatest Victory
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 1993. Solid, short account of the campaign, armies, and personalities 
involved.Park, Yune-Hee. 
Yi-Sun Shin and His Turtleboat Armada
. Seoul: Shinsaeng Press, 1973. Entertaining but less scholarly account of the admiral’s life and 

achievements.Peers, C. Soldiers of the Dragon: Chinese Armies, 1500 BC–AD 1840
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2006. Handy compendium of Osprey titles that 
covers weapons, tactics, and organization of Chinese armies over a long 

stretch of time, including the Tang dynasty.
Pleshakov, Constantine. 
The Tsar’s Last Armada
. New York: Basic Books, 


and the Battle of Tsushima that is particularly good on quoting Russian 

sources.Plutarch, Life of Flamininus. Biography of the Roman general by the ancient Greek author.
Pocock, Tom, ed. 
Trafalgar: An Eyewitness History
. New York: Penguin, 
2005. Useful and enlightening collection of eyewitness accounts of the battle 

and the key people involved.257Polybius. History of Rome. Account of Rome’s conquest of the Greek east, 
including the fullest description of the Battle of Cynoscephalae, by an 
ancient Greek historian.Portal, J., ed. The First Emperor: China’s Terracotta Army
. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007. Excellent, well-illustrated collection of 
articles on Shi Huangdi and his tomb by various scholars.Prange, Gordon. Miracle at Midway. New York: McGraw Hill, 1982. 
Popular, highly readable retelling of the battle that somewhat exaggerates it 

as a mismatch.Reid, S. Quebec 1759. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2003. Short but solid 
account with nice maps.Riley-Smith, J. S. C. The Crusades: A History
. New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2005. Good, accessible, one-volume account of the overall story of 
the Crusades by a leading historian of the subject.Robinson, Charles. The Spanish Invasion of Mexico. London: Osprey Publishing, 2004. A brief but well-balanced and well-illustrated introduction 

to the story of the conquest.Sandhu, G. S. A Military History of Medieval India
. New Delhi: Vision, 
2003. Comprehensive survey of a long span of Indian warfare, covering 
everything from weapons to logistics.Sansom, George. 
A History of Japan, 1334–1615
. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1961. Volume 3 of a multipart series on Japan that offers 

good if somewhat dated coverage of the political situation leading up to 
Sekigahara, as well as describing the battle.Sawyer, R. 
Ancient Chinese Warfare
. New York: Basic Books, 2011. 
Detailed look at Chinese warfare that focuses almost exclusively on its 
earliest periods.258BibliographySears, Stephan. Landscape Turned Red: The Battle of Antietam
. New York: 
Mariner Books, 2003. Good, detailed account of the battle, with many 
eyewitness quotes and nice maps.Sekunda, Nick, and John Warry. 
Alexander the Great
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2004. Well-illustrated book on Alexander that focuses heavily on 

his battles and his role as a general.Shaw, Ian, and Daniel Boatright. “Ancient Egyptian Warfare.” In 
The Ancient World at War: A Global History
, edited by Philip de Souza, pp. 29–45. London: Thames & Hudson, 2008. Up-to-date summary of Egyptian 

warfare and tactics in a volume that is an excellent introduction to ancient 
warfare generally.
Shepherd, William. 
Plataea 479 BC: The Most Glorious Victory Ever Seen
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2012. Probably the best general introduction to 
the battle. A solid entry in the Osprey “campaign” series.
Sheppard, S. Actium 31 BC. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2009. Nice general account of the battle and the campaign leading up to it.Singh, Harjeet. Cannons versus Elephants: The Battles of Panipat. New Delhi: Pentagon, 2011. Detailed look at the three battles of Panipat by a 


Stacey, C. P. 
Quebec 1759: The Siege and the Battle. Montreal: Robin Brass, 2002. Excellent, well-balanced study of the campaign for Quebec 
that includes particularly good illustrations, as well as a useful series of 
appendices of primary source documents.Steinberg, Jonathan. 
Bismarck: A Life
. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. Detailed biography of the statesman that is often critical of its subject.
Stoye, John. The Siege of Vienna: The Last Great Trial Between Cross and 
Crescent
. New York: Pegasus Books, 2000 (1964). Classic work on the 
siege. Getting a bit old but still solid.259Sumner, Ian. 
The First Battle of the Marne
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2010. Typical Osprey publication—a short but reliable account of the battle, 

accompanied by excellent maps.Symonds, Craig. The Battle of Midway. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. Excellent, balanced narrative that takes into account recent scholarship 

on the campaign.Thomas, Hugh. Conquest: Montezuma, Cortes, and the Fall of Old Mexico. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1993. A readable but very long and highly 

detailed narrative of the conquest.Tuchman, Barbara. 
The Guns of August
. New York: Macmillan, 1962. 
Pulitzer prize–winning, highly entertaining narrative of the beginning of 
World War I, ending with the Battle of the Marne.
Turnbull, Stephen. 
The Samurai Invasion of Korea
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2008. Well-illustrated text that is probably the best short overall 

description of the invasions.———. Fighting Ships of the Far East, vol. 2. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2003. Focused study of the structure and design of the vessels used by Korea 
and Japan during the invasions.———. Genghis Khan and the Mongol Conquests. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2003. Typically solid Osprey offering: a short but comprehensive 

summary with copious illustrations.———. Tannenberg 1410: Disaster for the Teutonic Knights
. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2003. Short but solid account of the battle, the main 
———. Battles of the Samurai. London: Arms and Armor, 1987. Book 
written by a famous military historian of feudal Japan that covers eight 
famous samurai battles, including Sekigahara.260BibliographyUrban, William. 
The Teutonic Knights: A Military History
. London: Greenhill, 2003. Good, reliable, and readable volume tracing the rise and fall 
of the order, with an entire chapter on the Battle of Tannenberg.
———. Tannenberg and After
. Chicago: Lithuanian Research Center, 
1999. Authoritative narrative of events leading up to the battle and its 

consequences. Particularly strong on tracing nuances of politics among the 
Knights, Poles, Lithuanians, and other groups involved.Verma, H. N., and A. Verma. 
Decisive Battles of India through the Ages
. Campbell, CA: GIP Books, 1994. Brief but clear coverage of the battles of 

Talas and Tarain and the tactics used.
Wawro, Geoffrey. 
The Austro-Prussian War
. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. Good account of the entire war that includes a 

thorough description of the Battle of Königgrätz.Weir, William. 
50 Battles That Changed the World
. Franklin Lakes, NJ: New Page Books, 2004. Offers a somewhat more opinionated list of decisive 

battles, but the books makes entertaining and thought-provoking reading.Wheatcroft, Andrew. 
The Enemy at the Gate: Habsburgs, Ottomans, and 
the Battle for Europe
. New York: Basic Books, 2008. Detailed account that 
includes a description of the campaign leading up to the siege of Vienna and 

its aftermath.Wink, André. 
Akbar. Oxford: Oneworld Publications, 2009. Engaging biography of the Mughal emperor by a leading scholar.
Yi, Sun-sin. 
War Diary of Admiral Yi Sun-Sin
. Seoul: Yonsei University 
Press, 1977. Solid English translation of Admiral Yi’s interesting diary.
Yupanqui, Titu Cusi. 
An Inca Account of the Conquest of Peru
. R. Bauer, 


version of the conquest from the Inca perspective by a man who was present 
at most of the key events.